# Advancing Protein
Display on Bacterial Spores through
an Extensive Survey of Coat Components

## Abstract

AbstractThe profound stability
of bacterial spores makes them
a promising
platform for biotechnological applications like biocatalysis, bioremediation,
drug delivery, etc. However, though the Bacillus subtilis spore is composed of >40 types of proteins, only ∼12 have
been explored as fusion carriers for protein display. Here, we assessed
the suitability of 33 spore proteins (SPs) as enzyme display carriers
by direct allele tagging at native genomic loci. Of the 33 SPs investigated,
26 formed functional fusions with β-glucuronidase (GUS)a
∼272 kDa homotetramer. This almost triples the number of SPs
assessed for enzyme display and doubles the number of functional fusions
documented in the literature. We quantitatively assessed 1) SP promoter
activation dynamics, 2) GUS activity on spores, 3) surface availability,
and 4) protection from thermal and proteolytic degradation. Multicopy
expression and pairwise coexpression of the most promising SP-GUS
fusions highlighted the complexity of spore structure/assembly and
the difficulty in predicting compatibility between different SP fusions.
We also assessed the suitability of engineered spores to degrade PET
(polyethylene terephthalate) films and found that surface-exposed
SPs were most effective. Beyond the broad survey, a key outcome of
our work was the identification of SscA (small spore coat assembly protein A) as an effective spore display carrier. SscA supported
enzyme activity at least 4-fold higher than any other SP, including
the well-established anchor, CotY. We attribute this to its promoter,
which demonstrated early and sustained activation relative to other
SPs and its small size (∼3 kDa), which likely minimally interferes
with enzyme folding, oligomerization, and activity. Labeling and genetic
studies, its hydrophobic nature, and low surface availability suggest
that SscA assembles within the inner spore coat, which makes it stabilizing
and suitable for many biocatalytic applications. Overall, this work
serves as a knowledge base to advance the biotechnological utility
of B. subtilis spores.Keywords: biocatalysis, immobilization, Bacillus
subtilis, cotransformation, genome editing


## Introduction


Surface display technologies are highly
versatile, genetically
encoded protein presentation platforms used to characterize, engineer,
and deliver proteins.
−



 In addition to simplifying manipulation and substrate/target accessibility,
surface fusion can enhance the stability of the displayed protein
against a variety of denaturants, making surface display attractive
for a range of biotechnological applications, including biocatalysis,
drug delivery, bioremediation, etc. In particular, bacterial (endo)­spore
display has garnered interest for the deployment of proteins in more
challenging or extreme conditions due to the robust nature of spores. Spores remain intact and viable under intense
thermal, pH, protease, and solvent stresses, and some of this stability
can be passed on to displayed proteins.
,

To enable
spore display, the protein of interest is genetically
fused to a component of the proteinaceous shell that surrounds the
spore core.
−

 One of the most studied sporulating microbes is the
model Gram-positive bacteriumB. subtilis Detailed localization and interaction studies of proteins expressed
during sporulation have revealed theB. subtilisspore to be a complex structure of more than 40 proteins organized
into morphologically distinct layers, including the (i) basement layer,
(ii) inner coat, (iii) outer coat, and (iv) crust.
,−

 While many spore proteins (SPs) have been successfully
fused to fluorophores to determine protein localization, only a limited number have been investigated
for functional applications of spore display. Most SPs investigated
for display applications are crust (CgeA, CotV, CotW, CotX, CotY,
CotZ) or outer coat proteins (CotA, CotB, CotC, CotD, CotG), while
a limited number of studies have also explored the use of the inner
coat protein OxdD.
,−

 Although these
studies hint at the robustness of spores and the versatility of different
components to support display, most SPs remain unexplored for their
suitability for spore display.

In this study, we sought to provide
a broad, functional characterization
of SPs as fusion partners in order to provide guidance on the design
of spore display systems. After a thorough analysis of potential SP
fusion partners, we developed a plate-based screening method for allelic
tagging of SPs with an enzyme reporter at their native loci via natural
cotransformation/congression. We characterized the most active fusions’
ability to (i) assemble onto spores, (ii) support enzymatic activity,
(iii) be surface-accessible, (iv) stabilize fusion partners against
thermal and proteolytic inactivation, (v) express in multicopy and
coexpress together, and (vi) sporulate efficiently. Our initial results
highlighted a previously understudied protein, SscA, as a highly promising candidate for spore display. By exploring
the activity of combinations of the most active fusions, we also show
that optimal combinations of spore-display fusions cannot be determined
by simply selecting the most active individual fusions. Finally, we
explored the accessibility of our top fusion partners to larger substrates
by displaying the plastic-degrading enzyme DuraPETase on the spore
surface and demonstrating functional degradation of PET films. Cumulatively, this work describes the most extensive
and direct comparison of different SPs for their suitability to spore
display and will aid in the design of better spore display constructs
for a variety of biotechnological applications.


## Results



## A Plate-Based
Screening Method Facilitates Identification of
Scarless Allelic Fusions of Spore Proteins (SPs)


MostB. subtilis spore display studies integrate fusion
constructs at neutral genomic loci (e.g., amyE, lacA, thrC, etc.), which result in two
copies of the SPthe fusion and the wild-type (WT). However, spores assembled from such designs
may not accurately reflect SP fusion potential due to competition
between copies of SPs and expression from non-native genomic contextsboth
of which can alter spore coat composition and/or integrity. To mitigate
these issues, we decided to assess the suitability of each SP (the
carrier) by directly tagging it at its native genetic locus with a
reporter (the cargo). After identifying more than 50 known spore coat
proteins, we narrowed the candidate field by removing any SPs previously
identified as critical for proper spore assembly or known to impede
sporulation as a fusion (Table S1). For
the remaining 44 SP candidates identified (Figure S1), we designed a theoretical spore display library of 88
N- and C-terminal integration cassettes that consist of 2 kb homology
arms flanking the β-glucuronidase gene (uidA, GUS), a GSSSG spacer linking uidA to the SP, and
a His6 tag on the free terminus of uidA (Supplementary Data File 1). To ensure
scarless tagging, we leveraged congression during natural transformation
inB. subtilis. After cotransforming
the fusion constructs along with an unlinked selectable marker (linearized
pBS1K/C) that integrates at an unlinked locus (amyE), we directly plated the cells on sporulation agar containing X-gluc
(5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-β-d-glucuronic acid) for
blue/white screening (Figure 
A,B, Figure S2).

Construction of GUS-tagged
spore protein (SP) library using cotransformation. A) Schematic of the cotransformation process and integration
vector design. Linearized plasmid P1 carries a selectable antibiotic
cassette with flanking homology to target integration at the amyE locus. Linearized plasmid P2 encodes N- or C-terminal
fusions of gusA to the SP gene with 2 kb homology
arms for scarless allelic tagging. B) Screen for GUS+ colonies where blue colonies in the plate screen indicate
functional expression of SP-GUS fusion. C) Location of
the 33 unique spore proteins for which constructs were made: crust
(blue), outer coat (yellow), inner coat (green), cortex/basement layer
(orange), and unknown location (black). D) Cotransformation
frequencies ranged between 1.5% and 6% for the 8 loci used to assess
factors affecting congression. The locations of amyE and ter are also indicated for reference. The locations
of all 44 loci under investigation are in Figure S1.

Of the 88 possible constructs
designed, we were
able to successfully
synthesize 52 integration vectors, which represented at least one
N- or C-terminal fusion for 33 of the original 44 SPs (Figure 
C). On screening these 52 vectors
for GUS activity on sporulation plates, we found that 34 constructs
(∼65%) produced blue colonies and could be verified as integrated
at the expected locus by PCR. This corresponds to 26 unique spore
proteins, of which 9 have uncharacterized localization, and the remaining
are distributed across the 4 distinct layers of the spore: (i) cortex/basement
layer, (ii) inner coat, (iii) outer coat, and (iv) crust. C-terminal
fusions accounted for 23 of the 34 active GUS fusions, and 16 were
fused to SPs that have not been previously used for spore-display
of enzymes (Table S2). Two constructs (N-
and C-terminal fusions of PdaB) generated blue colonies on plates
but did not yield spores with functional GUS, indicating a functional
fusion protein that failed to correctly load onto spores.

Collectively,
cotransformation efficiency (efficiency = blue colonies/AbR colonies) ranged considerably for the 34 integration vectors.
We further evaluated 8 of these constructs (targeting loci spread
throughout the B. subtilis genome)
to identify any features that may contribute to the differences in
the observed cotransformation efficiencies (Figure 
D). Although congression has previously been
reported to correlate with the distance from the selected marker and
replication fork, we did not find any such trend in our studies. We
also found no correlation with the size of the spore protein being
targeted or the gene orientation. Analysis of the sense DNA strand
suggested that the cotransformation efficiency was modestly correlated
positively to the A (adenosine) content (R
2 = 0.38) and negatively to the G (guanosine) content (R
2 = 0.67) (Figure S3A–B). Further, it was strongly positively correlated to the A+C content
(R
2 = 0.91) (Figure S3C). Since altering the A+C content of the sense strand does
not affect annealing interactions with its complementary strand, we
investigated the Gibbs free energy of the most stable predicted secondary
structure formed by the integration cassette and found that it correlated
negatively with cotransformation efficiency (R
2 = 0.68) (Figure S3D). Since DNA
enters the cytoplasm in single-stranded form, our data suggest that
highly stable secondary structure formation may adversely affect integration
efficiency. Given that these observations are based on an analysis
of a small subset of constructs, additional work will need to be conducted
in the future to assess the role of locus, composition, direction,
and sequence on congression efficiency.


## Allelic Tags Provide Insight
into SP Promoter Dynamics


To determine the relative expression
and activation timing of the
different SP promoters, we performed time-course studies of GUS activity
on sporulation plates for all 34 fusion constructs that produced blue
colonies (Figure 
A–F).
Though the observed activity of N- and C-terminal fusions of PdaBthe
only SP from the cortex/basement layerwas relatively weak,
strong GUS expression could be detected from protein within all other
layers of the spore. SPs could be generally divided into three main
categories: (I) very low activity, which are either poorly expressed
and/or form inactive fusions with GUS; (II) late expression/low activity,
which exhibit activity after an extended incubation; (III) early expression/high
activity, which shows significant activity early that is retained
during extended incubation (Figure 
G). Half (17) of the tested constructs fall within
(III). Interestingly, the location within the spore did not correlate
with any of these three categoriziess, which suggests that promoter
strength and tolerance to GUS fusion are stronger determinants of
activity than localization within the spore.

Activity dynamics of
SP-GUS fusions under screen conditions. A) Time-course
images of colonies of the 34 B. subtilis strains with confirmed GUS-tagged SP
alleles (WT: gray; cortex/basement: orange; inner coat: green; outer
coat: yellow; crust: blue; unknown location: black). Quantified time-course
GUS activity determined by image analysis of microcolonies in (A)
for B) cortex/basement, C) inner coat, D) outer coat, E) crust, F) unknown
location SP-GUS fusions. Data points are the average of 2 biological
replicates, and error bars are SEM. G) Scatter plot of
24 and 48 h average GUS activity. SP-GUS fusions can demonstrate (I)
low activity, (II) activity during late sporulation, and (III) activity
during early and late sporulation. The five most active fusions are
listed in the inset “Top 5” for both 24 and 48 h time
points.


## Characterization of GUS
Activity on Spores Identifies SscA as
a Promising Carrier for Biocatalysis


While the plate assay
effectively determined relative promoter activation and expression
of active SP fusions, it did not indicate whether the fusions were
properly incorporated into spores. Detectable GUS activity can be
attributed to enzyme derived from vegetative cells, actively differentiating
cells, and/or lysed mother cells that were not incorporated into spores.
To assess spore-specific GUS activity, we generated spores in liquid
cultures and thoroughly washed them to remove nonspecifically bound
proteins. We found that basement/cortex fusions were inactive on spores
as well, whereas all other fusions yielded some degree of activity
(Figure 
A). The highest
activity fusion partners with known locations are in the outer coat
and crust of the spore. Specifically, CotY, CotG, CotX, and CgeA were
4 of the 5 best-performing fusion partners, which supports their general
popularity as fusion partners in the published literature.
,
 Interestingly, SscAa small protein of ∼3 kDa with
an unknown location that has not previously been assessed as a carrier
for spore displayyielded the highest activity among all SPs
tested, with more than 4-fold higher activity relative to the next
most active fusion partner, CotY.

Relative activity of spore displayed SP-GUS
fusions. A) Activity of SP-GUS fusions that have assembled
onto spores determined
using the NPG substrate. WT spores were used for background subtraction
and, therefore, set to 0 activity. Data represent an average of 6
biological replicates, and error bars are SEM. * SscA-C activity is
higher than all other fusions (ANOVA, P < 0.0001).
Activity data are OD-normalized. B) Correlational plot
of relative GUS activity on solid and liquid media. Activity on agar
plates is the slope of the average activity of fusions from 15 to
27 h indicated in Figure 
B–G, and that from liquid culture is the end data point
shown in Figure 
D.
NC are negative candidates, WC are weak candidates, and SC are strong
candidates. C) Plot of liquid culture activity per the
activity categories defined in Figure 
G. Both WC and SC exhibit activity designated as category
(III) on plate assays. ** SC and WC population liquid activity are
significantly different (Lognormal Welch’s t test, P < 0.0001).

To determine the effectiveness of the plate assay
to identify candidates
for spore display, we compared the GUS activity on plates (determined
using the slope during early growth, 15–27 h) and that of isolated
spores (derived from liquid cultures). Both data sets were normalized
to the maximum, and values below the limit of detection were set to
0.0001 to accommodate the log scale. From this analysis, fusions could
be categorized into 3 groups: (i) strong candidates (SC), which have
high activity in both plate and washed spore preparations; (ii) weak
candidates (WC), which demonstrate high activity on plates but low
activity as isolated spores; and (iii) negative candidates (NC), which
have low activity as both colonies on plates and as washed spores
(Figure 
B). We did
not find any candidates that demonstrated low activity on plates but
high activity as spores, highlighting the robustness of the plate-based
screening. We found that all SC and WC are category (III) of the plate
screen (Figure 
C),
which represents 50% (17/34) of the fusion candidates, 47% (8/17)
of which are SC. This demonstrates that the plate-based screen is
a reliable approach to eliminate inactive or low-activity fusion proteins.


## Crust Protein Fusions Are Most Surface-Accessible


Surface
accessibility is an important metric for certain spore display applications,
such as antigen presentation and polymer degradation.
−


 To assess surface accessibility using immunostaining, we wanted
to isolate highly pure spores. However, when we attempted to purify
spores from cultures using the standard lysozyme treatment approach, we found that it produced insoluble aggregates
of cell debris that bound the secondary antibody and distorted results
(Figure S4). Therefore, we developed an
alternative spore purification method that relies on the separation
of spores and cells via differential centrifugation. Our method makes
use of the differences in the spore and vegetative cell size and densities.
Centrifugation generates a layer of loosely packed spores on top of
a tightly packed bed of cells and forespores (Figure 
A, inset). Using purified spores, we characterized
the surface accessibility of the SP-GUS spores by labeling them with
two different primary antibodies that target the His6 tag
or GUS, respectively, in independent experiments (Figure 
A and Figure S5). In general, the polyclonal anti-GUS antibody provided
higher surface detection levels than the monoclonal anti-His6 antibody, likely due to its ability to probe multiple epitopes in
a complex spore assembly where any single epitope could be occluded
due to packing/steric hindrances. Our results indicate that CotY-C
was by far the most surface-accessible of the fusions, while SscA-C
was largely undetectable. In general, we found that the measured surface
availability correlated well with our expectations based on the published
spore structure. Specifically, crust and outer coat proteins yielded
stronger signals than basement and cortex proteins (Figure 
B). However, there were several
notable exceptions. For example, CotW and CotG, which have been proposed
to comprise the outermost layers of the spore, had the lowest signals. Conversely, the inner coat protein OxdD was
highly detectable. These results are consistent with observations
of Potot et al., who noted that an OxdD fusion was more surface-exposed
than CotG. This suggests that OxdD may
not only be confined to the inner coat. Proteins with previously uncharacterized
locations generally exhibited moderate to low surface availability.
Interestingly, EcsB-C, PrtG-C, YqfQ-C, and YtrH-C exhibited surface
detection equivalent to that of crust and outer coat proteins, suggesting
that they may also assemble at the periphery of spores.

Surface accessibility
of SP-GUS fusions. A) Mean fluorescence
of purified, immunostained spores normalized to WT. Immunostaining
was performed using two primary antibodies that target different antigens:
anti-His6 (bottom) and anti-GUS (top). In both cases, a
fluorescent secondary antibody was used for detection, and spores
were analyzed via flow cytometry. Samples are arranged in order from
lowest to highest combined fluorescence. * indicates a mean population
fluorescence significantly greater than WT, P <
0.05 (Kruskal–Wallis one-way ANOVA). All strains that have
a mean fluorescent signal ≥2× WT are indicated with **.
The inset shows layering of spores on top of cells in sporulation
cultures and validation of spore purity in the top layer using phase
microscopy at 100× magnification. B) Relative fluorescence
of samples shown in (A) organized by location in the spore. Bars indicate
the median value for the spore layer and show a trend of decreasing
detectability when GUS is fused to spore proteins located in deeper
spore layers.


## Several SP Fusions Stabilize
GUS against Inactivating Agents
but Do Not Significantly Affect Sporulation Efficiency


Thermal
denaturation and proteolytic degradation are common challenges encountered
by enzymes during biocatalysis. We investigated how resilient our
15 most active spore fusions were against these challenges using washed
spores in suspension. For the thermostability challenge, we incubated
purified GUS and SP-GUS spores for 15 min at 37, 50, and 60 °C.
While the free enzyme control showed no significant loss of activity
at 37 °C, incubation at 50 and 60 °C resulted in only 27%
residual activity and complete loss of activity, respectively (Figure 
A, Figure S6). In contrast, all the SP-GUS fusions retained at
least 78% activity after the 50 °C incubation, with most (CgeA-C,
CotY-C, CotX-C, CotW-C, CotC-C, CotG-C, CotU-C, EcsB-C, SscA-C) exhibiting
elevated activitya phenomenon commonly observed due to stabilization
by surface display.
−


 Even after the 60 °C challenge, 6 fusions exhibited greater
than 50% residual activity. CgeA-C retained the most relative activity
(85%) at 60 °C, though SscA still retained more than 5-fold higher
total GUS activity compared to CgeA-C. Upon challenge with 0.1 mg
mL–1 trypsin, we also saw elevated activity for
most SP-GUS fusions (Figure 
B, Figure S7). Increasing trypsin
concentrations to 1.0 mg mL–1 generally resulted
in a loss of activity, though most fusions still retained at least
50% activity relative to control untreated spores. Further, SscA retained
the highest activity at all trypsin concentrations, retaining 91%
relative activity even when treated with 1.0 mg mL–1 trypsin.

Assessing GUS stability against inactivating challenges. A) Residual activity of SP-GUS fusions after 15 min incubation
at the indicated temperatures. The free enzyme rapidly inactivates
at elevated temperatures, whereas most fusionsespecially those
on the crustdemonstrate modest thermal activation at 37 and
50 °C, and inactivation at 60 °C. Individual data points
are shown in Figure S6. B) The free enzyme rapidly inactivates on protease treatment, whereas
most spore coat-displayed fusions are protected. Fusions to crust
proteins are the least protective, as expected, given their solvent
accessibility. Individual data points are shown in Figure S7. For both (A) and (B), activity is relative to the
initial activity at 37 °C for each construct. Activity data are
OD-normalized. C) Flow cytometric, D) fluorescence,
and E) phase-contrast images demonstrating the isolation
of purified spores. SYBR Safe stains only mother and vegetative cells
and does not label spores. Conversely, F) flow cytometric, G) fluorescence, and H) phase-contrast images
of unpurified samples show unlabeled spores and labeled cells. I) Sporulation efficiency of all constructs was approximately
even. U = unknown location, IC = inner crust, OC = outer crust. Temperature
and protease challenge values are the mean of three biological replicates.

To assess whether modification of spores at their
native locus
alters sporulation efficiency, we developed a method of differential
staining using the DNA-binding dye SYBR Safe. The difference in permeability
of the spore and cell membranes permits staining of vegetative and
mother cells, while leaving spores unstained (Figure 
C–H). Wild-type spores purified using
our previously described purification protocol showed no fluorescence
and are phase-bright (Figure 
C–E). Unpurified samples revealed the selective staining
of remaining phase dark cells following sporulation (Figure 
F–H). This demonstrates
that the centrifugation-based approach is effective at isolating highly
pure spores. Since spore and cell fractions can be efficiently distinguished,
we assessed the sporulation efficiency of SP-GUS fusions using flow
cytometry. In all cases, sporulation efficiency ranged from ∼45%
to 55%, indicating only minor changes in sporulation efficiency for
SP-GUS-expressing strains (Figure 
I).


## Coexpression of Select SP-GUS Fusions Highlights
the Complexity
of Their Assembly on Spores


Coexpression of multiple fusions
could increase the display density of GUS and provide insights into
the compatibility of different SPs for engineering applications. We
first investigated the locus dependence and coloading potential by
comparing the activity of the five most active SP-GUS fusions (SscA-C,
CotX-C, CotY-C, CotG-C, and CgeA-C) when integrated at: (i) amyE only (amyEΔ::sp-gusA sp

+
), (ii) amyE only with the
native SP copy knocked out (amyEΔ::sp-gusA spΔ::erm), (iii) the native locus only (amyE

+

sp:sp-gusA), and (iv) both the amyE and native loci (amyEΔ::sp-gusA sp:sp-gusA) (Figure 
A). All
constructs expressed genes using their native promoters, and assays
were performed using purified spores in suspension. Interestingly,
we found that the fusions exhibited quite varied responses depending
on the integration locus and the presence of a second copy of the
SP gene. The CgeA-C fusion was slightly more active when integrated
at the native locus and was not affected by an additional copy of
unmodified or gusA-tagged cgeA.
Conversely, the activity of the CotG-C fusion was higher when integrated
at the amyE locus relative to its native locus. It
was not affected by the presence of unmodified cotG, and, surprisingly, the activity of the double integrant was lower
when compared to a single integrant. The activity of CotX-C was improved
in the presence of WT cotX, did not differ measurably
based on the integration locus, and improved markedly when integrated
at two loci. The activity of the CotY-C fusion was also higher when
present in two copies. However, unlike that of CotX-C, its activity
was higher from the native locus relative to that from amyE. Interestingly, activity from the amyE locus improved
when the WT copy was knocked out. Compared to other spore carriers,
SscA-C demonstrated the least variation based on locus and copy number
and retained high activity with all constructs tested.

Coexpression analysis
of promising spore display candidates. A) Assessing the
genetic context dependence of SP-GUS fusion
activity. The sp-gusA fusion gene was expressed after
integration at the amyE locus only, the native locus
of the SP, or both. In the first case, the native copy of the SP gene
was left intact or knocked out. Only fusions to CotX-C and CotY-C
showed higher activity when expressed from two different loci. SscA-C
fusions demonstrated high activity in all configurations. The locus
dependence on the presence of a second WT or tagged SP gene copy was
gene-dependent. B) Coexpression of two GUS fusions: one
from the native locus (sp) and the other from amyE. SscA-C and CotX-C fusions (at their native loci) generally
yielded higher activity when coexpressed with fusions of other proteins
expressed from the amyE locus. Activities are represented
relative to the SscA-C fusion at its native locus. Individual data
points are shown in Figure S8. Activity
data are OD-normalized.

We next tested the coexpression
of two of the top
five GUS fusionsone
at the native SP locus and the other at amyE (Figure 
B, Figure S8). In general, fusions expressed from the amyE locus often yielded higher activity when coexpressed
with CotX-C and SscA-C fusions from their native loci. Specifically,
CotX-C and CotG-C were the most synergistic as were SscA-C with CotG-C
and CotY-C. Overall, the behavior and interactions of the fusions
were very SP-dependent, further highlighting the complexity of spore
assembly, structure, and the genetic context of associated gene expression.


## Spore-Displayed PETase Is Most Active When Surface-Accessible


Although SscA is a promising display anchor for GUSan enzyme
with a small, freely diffusible substratewe wanted to assess
how it and other SPs would support the activity of an enzyme with
a large, insoluble substrate. We selected the PET (polyethylene terephthalate)
depolymerizing enzyme, DuraPETase, and
generated fusions with the five most promising GUS fusion carriers
and integrated them at amyE. When we first estimated
PETase activity using the small molecule substrate analog p-nitrophenol acetate (pNPA), we found that the SscA-C fusion
displayed the highest activity (Figure 
A, Figure S9). However,
when we tested the enzymatic activity of the same five engineered
spores on PET films, we found that the CotY-C fusion was the most
active (Figure 
B).
This is consistent with the high surface accessibility relative to
other SPs. The CgeA-C fusion demonstrated relatively low activity,
consistent with prior reports by Bartels et al., who found fusion
of laccases to this protein to not be very active. A closer inspection of the PET disks by scanning electron
microscopy illustrates that those treated with purified and CotY-fused
DuraPETase show etch and/or pit marks, suggesting they are being enzymatically
hydrolyzed (Figure 
B). Interestingly, SscA still demonstrated moderately high activity,
equivalent to, or higher than, other crust proteins like CgeA and
CotXindicating that it may still present enzymes to the surface
and a highly versatile anchor for spore display. Overall, it seems
that expression level and surface accessibility are both major determinants
of activity on insoluble PET. To contextualize our results, we evaluated
the genetic dependence of SscA-C-mEYFP on morphogenic proteins for
the inner coat (SafA), outer coat (CotE), and crust (CotX/Y/Z) (Figure S10). We found that SscA-mEYFP loading
is greatly hindered in the safA deletion strainits
localization is primarily isolated to one or both poles of the spores.
This safA-dependent loading is characteristic of
other inner coat spore proteins, including OxdD and YeeK. The limited surface accessibility of SscA, as
well as its safA-dependent coat loading, strongly
indicates that SscA is an inner coat protein.

Assessing the activity
of SP-PETase fusions using pNPA and PET
disks. C-terminal fusions of DuraPETase to CgeA, CotG, CotX, CotY,
and SscA were active on A) the soluble substrate pNPA
(p-nitrophenol acetate) and an end-use PET disk.
The SscA-C fusion was the most active on the soluble substrate, whereas
the CotY fusion was the most active on insoluble PET. Data are averages
of three replicates with standard deviation. Columns are the means
of three biological replicates, and error bars are SEM. B) Scanning electron microscopy images of PET films treated with control
WT B. subtilis spores (left), purified
DuraPETase (middle), and B. subtilis spores expressing the CotY-DuraPETase fusion (right). The unmodified
spores were unable to etch the disks, whereas the purified enzyme
and recombinant spores visibly modified the PET surface. Activity
data are OD-normalized.


## Discussion


The
profound stability of bacterial endospores
and unique ability
to combine protein expression with surface immobilization independent
from secretion or soluble-protein purification positions spores as
a powerful tool for diverse applications. In this work, we almost
triple the number of SPs tested as carriers for display to 33 and
identify 26 functional fusions, of which 16 had not previously been
used as display carriers. Although our goal was to assess 44 coat
proteins, 9 protein fusions could not be characterized due to technical
difficulties with DNA synthesis and strain construction. We selected
GUS as the reporter to evaluate SPs as potential fusion partners for
two major reasons: (i) ease of characterization and (ii) because as
a >270 kDa tetrameric enzyme, it is more representative of fusion
proteins used in biocatalysis than model monomeric fluorescent proteins
and enzymes. One of our key findings was the discovery of SscA as
a spore protein (SP) carrier, which is poorly characterized and not
documented for engineering applications. The SscA fusion was approximately
4-fold more active than other well-characterized best-in-class SPs
like CotY and CotG. This could partly be attributed to the small size
of SscA, being a 28 aa long peptide, which may minimally interfere
with the folding and activity of enzymes like GUS. The early and sustained
activation of the SscA promoter may also be a contributor to the high
level of activity seen for its GUS fusion. A prior transcriptomic
analysis of spores reported that SscA was the only spore coat protein
in the top 46 of most abundant mRNAs, which also supports our assessment
that it is highly expressed. Additionally,
CotB, CotG, and CotH were previously found to be significantly reduced
in spores derived from a sscAΔ background,
suggesting SscA may play a key role in spore coat assembly. Its presence in several other Bacillus sp. (e.g., B. tequilensis, B. spizizenii, B.
inaquosorum, B. halotolerans, etc.) indicates that it could have similar potential utility in
other bacterial spores.

In addition to significantly expanding
the number of spore display
carriers, we used allelic tagging to fuse SPs to GUS rather than choosing
to create merodiploid strains. We constructed our strains by leveraging
congression during natural transformation, whereby unlinked cassettes
are concurrently integrated at different sites in the chromosome.
This also allowed us to briefly assess factors affecting congression.
We found that the melting temperature of the strongest secondary structure
within the sense strand of the 2 kb long homology arms was inversely
proportional to congression frequency. Although this work does not
provide any specific proof for this assertion, it provides a hypothesis
that could be tested more rigorously in future studies. In any case,
allelic tagging has previously not been used for spore display applications.
Based on our results, we found that direct modification of SPs at
their native loci can be beneficial in certain cases, like for SscA
and CotY, but in other cases, expression from amyE was preferred (e.g., CgeA, CotG, CotX). In either case, locus-specific
effects could contribute to differential activities since neither
the native locus nor the amyE locus is transcriptionally
insulated from neighboring genes. Allelic tagging also enabled us
to assess the promoter activation dynamics of all SPs. In general,
the best carriers were characterized by early-activating promoters
with prolonged expression. Late-activating promotersidentified
as those with low GUS activity within the first 24 hgenerally
yielded spores with relatively low GUS activity. While we cannot altogether
preclude that GUS fusions may alter protein stability, folding, etc.,
and therefore, our assessment of promoter dynamics, our results are
nevertheless consistent with the limited literature on the comparative
strengths of SP promoters and the resulting loading density of spore-displayed
cargo proteins.
,

An analysis of all fusion
proteins using immunostaining and flow
cytometry using anti-His6 and anti-GUS antibodies revealed
that CotY was the most surface-exposed protein of those tested. Overall,
the signals were higher with the polyclonal anti-GUS antibody. This
may be because it is able to bind to several epitopes and would therefore
be less sensitive to steric hindrances. Many known crust and outer
coat proteins like CotC, CotV, and CotX also demonstrated high surface
availability, whereas the basement/cortex protein PdaB and others
did not. But not all crust and outer coat proteins were highly surface-available,
and inner coat proteins like OxdD seemed to be more surface-exposed
than would be expected from their documented location. However, our
results are consistent with other spore-display studies that have
shown many noncrust proteins can result in surface-display of antigens
for spore-based vaccines and prior reports that inner proteins like
OxdD can load late since spores remain relatively permeable.
,,,,,
 Given that
information about SP localization is largely based on analyzing microscopy
images of fluorescently tagged proteins, results from our work and
from others highlight the need to reevaluate the accepted dogma that
SPs and SP-cargo fusions are confined to a single coat layereither
natively or during spore-display.
−

 It is possible, and
likely, based on our data, that spore coats are heterogeneous, and
SPs can localize to multiple layers during assembly. It may also be
that spore-display may result in unexpected protein interaction or
adsorption and lead to “misincorporation” of the native
SP into multiple layers. In any case, in recombinant systems like
ours (especially when modified with a large reporter like GUS), total
biocatalytic activity and surface availability are complex functions
of promoter dynamics, protein folding, spore assembly, and permeability.
Given that, our conclusions about localization were internally consistent
with the outcomes from the challenge studies. When we challenged 15
of the highest activity SP-GUS fusions to thermal and proteolytic
inactivation, we found that most conferred significant resistance
to loss in activity, especially compared to the free enzyme. As expected,
crust proteins were most susceptible to proteolytic degradation, whereas
proteins found internally were more stabilizing. Conversely, the crust
protein
fusions were some of the most stabilized against thermal inactivation.

We found that SscA was generally poorly surface-available when
fused to GUS. This, combined with the fact that it is hydrophobic,
its promoter is expressed relatively early, and that it is dependent
on safA for complete coat loading, suggests that
it may assemble at high copy numbers within the inner protein layers
of spores. Based on these results, our expectations were that surface-exposed
proteins would be more suitable fusion partners for enzymes that act
on insoluble substrates. When we fused DuraPETase to several spore
proteins, the highly surface-exposed CotY was found to be superior
in aiding in the degradation of PET disks than SscA. Thus, while the
small size and strong expression level of SscA make it an excellent
candidate for most proteins, its benefit is diminished when surface
accessibility is essential for activity. However, the SscA-DuraPETase
fusion was able to degrade PET (equivalently to another crust protein
fusion, CotX), indicating that under some genetic contexts, it may
also be surface-accessibleagain highlighting the putative
heterogeneity of spore assembly, especially in genetically engineered
contexts. However, it is worth noting that our analysis on PETase
activity is preliminary, and future studies may be needed to evaluate
the true potential of spore display and different SP carriers for
this application.

Our DNA constructs and data on promoter strength
and timing, total
activity, surface availability, stability, and combinatorial loading
should enable future users to make informed decisions when developing
vaccines, biocatalysts, and other products using spore display. Overall,
our extensive survey of spore proteins serves as a key resource for
applied scientists and engineers interested in leveraging spores for
biotechnological applications.


## Materials and Methods



## Bacterial
Strains and Culture Conditions


B. subtilis 168 (ΔtrpC) and
its derivatives were used for all experiments unless noted otherwise. E. coli DH5α or NEB5α was used for general
plasmid construction and propagation. General strain propagation was
performed in Luria–Bertani (LB) at 37 °C with 225 rpm
shaking or on LB agar (1.5%) plates. Chloramphenicol (5 μg mL–1) or kanamycin (10 μg mL–1) was added for selection in B. subtilis as required, and ampicillin (100 μg mL–1) for E. coli.


## Preparation of Naturally
Competent Cells and Transformations


Competent cells were
prepared as described previously with slight
modifications. A 1 mL aliquot of the
overnight B. subtilis LB culture was
diluted into 15 mL of prewarmed SM1 medium and incubated at 37 °C
with 225 rpm until it reached an OD600 of 0.5–0.6,
(∼4 h). An equal volume of prewarmed SM2 media was then added,
and the culture was incubated for an additional 90 min. Cells were
then portioned into 0.5 mL aliquots and used for transformation immediately
or stored at −80 °C after adding glycerol to a final concentration
of 10% (v/v). Transformation was performed by adding 100–500
ng of linearized vector DNA to competent cells, incubating for 1 h
at 37 °C at 225 rpm, and then plating on the appropriate selective
media.


## Spore Protein−β-Glucuronidase Fusion Construct
Design


N-terminal and C-terminal spore coat protein−β-glucuronidase
(SP-GUS) were designed to enable homologous recombination following
natural transformation. For N-terminal fusions of GUS to SPs, 2 kb
of genomic homology were amplified from the +3-nucleotide position
within the coding DNA sequence (CDS) of the SP to insert the GUS fusion
at the native locus. The upstream homology arm was amplified with
a C-terminal side primer overhang to introduce a flanking AscI cut
site between the homology arm and a His6 tag sequence.
The His6 tag sequence preceded a 3x­(4GS) linker sequence
flanked by a NotI site and the GUS sequence. The GUS sequence was
flanked by a coding SbfI site and a 3x­(4GS) linker sequence (no stop
codon) that joined its downstream homology arm which includes the
SP CDS and additional locus homology. For C-terminal constructs, 2
kb of genomic homology were amplified from the nucleotide preceding
the stop codon in each SP. A 3x­(4GS) linker was added to the SP CDS
which was flanked by an AscI site preceding the GUS CDS. The GUS CDS
was flanked by a NotI site, and a 3x­(4GS) linker to His6 tag sequence followed by an SbfI site and the downstream homology
arm. For sequences that contained AscI, NotI, or SbfI sites within
the CDS or homology arms, other restriction enzyme cut sites were
used on a case-by-case basis. All sequences are in Supplementary Data File 1. These constructs were then cloned
into the pENTR vector backbone. For coexpression analysis of the top
five anchors (CgeA, CotG, CotX, CotY, and SscA), the native promoters
defined as the region encompassing 300 bp upstream of the SP CDS start
codon and SP-GUS sequences for each were PCR-amplified from their
individual pENTR vector and cloned into pBS1K. These vectors were
then linearized and transformed into each of the following B. subtilis 168, B. subtilis (Δsp), and B. subtilis (sp:sp-gusA). B. subtilis (Δsp) strains were ordered from the BGSC:
ΔcgeA (BGSC ID: BKE19780), ΔcotG (BKE36070), ΔcotX (BKE11760), ΔcotY (BKE11750), ΔsscA (BKE9958).


## Cotransformation for In Situ Expression of SP-GUS Fusions


Freshly prepared competent cells were portioned into 0.5 mL aliquots,
to which 100 ng of linearized selection construct (pBS1K or pBS1C)
and 3 μg of linearized pENTR-SP-GUS construct were added and
gently mixed by pipetting followed by incubation at 37 °C and
225 rpm for 1 h. Subsequently, 0.5 mL of LB was added to each transformation
mixture and incubated for an additional hour. 0.2 mL fractions of
the culture were then plated on individual 2 × SG sporulation
plates containing an antibiotic for the primary marker (pBS1K = 10
μg mL–1 Kan, pBS1C = 5 μg mL–1 Cm) and X-gluc (5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-β-d-glucuronic
acid, 100 μg mL–1). Plates were then incubated
at 37 °C for 96 h, during which they were observed for the formation
of blue colonies. Blue colonies were colony-purified on 2 × SG
plates, and SP-GUS integration was confirmed by colony PCR. Two ×
SG sporulation plates were composed of 1.6% Difco Nutrient Broth,
0.05% MgSO4·7H2O, 0.2% KCl, 1 mM CaNO3, 1 mM MnCl2, 0.1 μM FeSO4, 0.1%
Glucose, and 1.5% w/v agar. An X-gluc
stock (100 mg mL–1 solution in dimethylformamide)
was freshly prepared and added to the autoclaved agar to a final concentration
of 100 μg mL–1.


## Imaging of GUS Activity
on Sporulation Plates and Quantification
of Promoter Activities


Overnight cultures of SP-GUS construct
strains were spotted on 2 × SG sporulation plates containing
X-gluc. Plates were incubated at 37 °C, and images were taken
in a lightbox using an iPhone camera at the labeled time points. The
magnitude of GUS activity was quantified using Fiji by averaging the
pixel intensity of an ROI defined by colony boundaries after background
subtraction using the color deconvolution tool.


## Sporulation
and Spore Purification


Sporulation was
performed by subculturing LB overnight cultures 1:200 into 2 mL of
Difco Sporulation Media (DSM: 0.8% w/v Tryptone, 0.1% w/v KCl, 1 mM
MgSO4, 10 μM MnCl2, 1 μM FeSO4, 0.5 mM CaCl2) and grown for 24 h at 37 °C
and 225 rpm. Spores were harvested after 24 h in DSM through centrifugation
at 21,000 × g for 2 min and washed 3 times with
500 μL of water. Following the wash, the top layer of spores
was carefully resuspended without disturbing the vegetative cells
below and moved to a fresh tube for analysis.


## GUS Activity and Challenge
Assays


Spore-displayed GUS
activity was quantified spectrophotometrically with the substrate
4-nitrophenyl β-glucopyranoside (NPG). Reactions were composed
of 140 μL reaction buffer (0.1% v/v β-mercaptoethanol
in PBS, pH = 7.4), 30 μL of substrate solution (4 mg mL–1 NPG in PBS, pH = 7.4), and 30 μL of spores
with a final OD600 of 0.1–0.3. Reactions were performed
at room temperature with continuous shaking in a 96-well flat-bottom
plate and measuring the increase in absorbance at 405 nm using a SpectraMax
M3 spectrophotometer (Molecular Devices, San Jose, CA). Purified spores,
resuspended in PBS (pH 7.4), were incubated at 25, 37, 50, and 60
°C for 15 min in a thermocycler, cooled to room temperature,
and tested for activity using the GUS Activity Assay outlined above.
Protease challenge of spores was performed by resuspending spores
in PBS containing 0.1–1.0 mg mL–1 trypsin,
incubating at 37 °C for 1 h, and testing for activity using the
GUS Activity Assay. GUS with an N-terminal His6 tag was
cloned into pACYC_Duet1, expressed in E. coli, and purified using Ni-NTA resin using standard methods to serve
as a control for evaluating thermal stability.


## Flow Cytometry


Surface detection of spore-displayed
SP-GUS was determined using immunohistochemistry and flow cytometry.
Following sporulation, cells were transferred to 50 mL conical flasks
and centrifuged at 2,400 × g for 10 min. The
pellet was then transferred to a 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube and washed
3× with PBS (pH = 7.4) with centrifugation done at 21,000 × g for 2 min. After the final centrifugation, the upper layer
of the cell pellet (Figure 
B) was isolated by gentle pipetting and resuspended in PBSA
(2.0% w/v Bovine Serum Albumin in PBS, pH = 7.4) at an OD600 = 1.0 for blocking. Following blocking, 50 μL fractions were
pelleted and resuspended in 200 μL of chilled PBSA containing
1 μg mL–1 primary antibody (anti-His6 tag mouse antibody, Invitrogen, Catalog # MA121315 or anti-GUS rabbit
antibody, Invitrogen, Catalog # A5790) and incubated for 1 h. This
was followed by four washes with 200 μL of chilled PBSA and
incubation with the secondary antibody in 200 μL of PBSA containing
1 μg mL–1 (AlexaFluor 467 goat antimouse,
Invitrogen, Catalog # A32728 or AlexaFluor 467 goat antirabbit, Invitrogen,
Catalog # A21245) for 1 h at 4 °C. Samples were then washed four
additional times in chilled 200 μL PBSA before being analyzed
using an Attune NxT Flow Cytometer (Invitrogen; Carlsbad, CA). 300,000
events were collected for each sample using the lowest possible collection
speed, 12.5 μL min–1, and five rinse cycles
were used between each sample to prevent carryover. Sporulation efficiency
of SP-GUS strains was performed by resuspending sporulation cultures
with 1× SYBR Safe DNA Stain in PBS and incubating for 30 min
in the dark. Following incubation, sporulation cultures were washed
1× with PBS, resuspended in PBS, and immediately analyzed via
flow cytometry. Gating for single spore events was based on the FSC-H
profile of 1 and 2 μm calibration beads (ThermoFisher, Catalog
# F13838). (Figure S5). Gating and analysis
were done using FCS Express Software (De Novo Software; Pasadena,
California).


## PETase Activity Assays and Imaging


DuraPETase was codon-optimized
for B. subtilis and ordered as a gene
fragment from Twist Biosciences. Standard cloning methods were used
to insert DuraPETase into the pBS1K-SP-GUS constructs such that they
replaced GUS, and these constructs were linearized and integrated
into B. subtilis. DuraPETase was also
cloned into pACYC_Duet1 with His66 tag, expressed in E. coli, and purified using Ni-NTA resin using standard
methods. To measure the activity of the spore-displayed PETase on
a small, soluble molecule, we used para-nitrophenol
acetate (pNPA, ThermoFisher Catalog # 128750050) as a substrate. A
pNPA stock solution (100 mg mL–1 in DMSO) was diluted
to 1.0 mg mL–1 in PETase Assay Buffer A (50 mM NaPO4, 90 mM NaCl, pH = 7.5). Washed spores were suspended to an
OD600 of ∼0.1–0.25 in PETase Assay Buffer
A, and 20 μL of spores were added to 180 μL of PETase
Assay Buffer containing 1.0 mg mL–1 pNPA prealiquoted
into a 96-well microplate. Reaction progression was evaluated by tracking
the formation of the pNP product at 405 nm with a SpectraMax M3 spectrophotometer
(Molecular Devices, San Jose, CA). The activity of the PETases on
insoluble polyethylene terephthalate (PET) discs was evaluated by
resuspending purified spores to OD600 of ∼1.0 in
PETase Assay Buffer B (100 mM KH2PO4, pH 8.0),
adding a single 1.0 cm PET disc, and incubating at 50 °C with
225 rpm shaking. After incubating for 48 h, relative PETase activity
was measured spectrophotometrically by detecting TPA and MHET product
formation at 260 nm. Standard curves of MHET and TPA and purified
DuraPETase were used to validate assay conditions (Figure S9). PETase-treated discs were imaged using a Phenom
G2 Pure Tabletop SEM operated at 5 kV. Discs were washed five times
with PBS, air-dried overnight, dehydrated with a 5 min 100% ethanol
bath, and sputter-coated with a gold–palladium mix prior to
imaging.


## Supplementary Material



## Acknowledgments


We thank all past and present members of
the Nair
lab for their helpful discussions. We would also like to thank Prof.
James A. Van Deventer (Tufts ChBE), Prof. Andrew Camilli (Tufts GSBS),
and Prof. Neel Joshi (Northeastern CCB) for their thoughtful feedback
on experimental designs. This work was supported by grants DP2HD091798,
R21HD105934 (NIH), and CBET-2208390 (NSF) to N.U.N. The work conducted
by the U.S. Department of Energy Joint Genome Institute award #503763,
a DOE Office of Science User Facility, is supported by the Office
of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy, operated under Contract
No. DE-AC02-05CH11231.

The Supporting Information is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/jacsau.6c00594.

Sequence information
on all 88 SP-GUS allele replacement
constructs (PDF)

Details on spore protein fusion construct designs and
loci; experimental results as figures and tables related to library
construction and recombinant spore characterization (PDF)

Enrich Bio,
Watertown, MA 02472, USA

Caravel
Bio, Portland, OR 97239, USA.

T.C.C., T.B.N.,
J.A.L.: Conceptualization; formal analysis; investigation; methodology;
data visualization; writingoriginal and revised draft. J.-F.C.,
A.T., A.K.: Formal analysis; investigation; methodology; data visualization;
writingediting and review. N.U.N.: Conceptualization; funding
acquisition; supervision; writingoriginal, review, and editing.

The authors
declare the following competing financial interest(s): Tufts University
has applied for a patent application based on this work. T.B.N. is
a co-founder, and A.K. is an employee of Caravel Bio.


## References



## Associated Data



## Supplementary Materials
