# Machine Learning-Guided
Protein Engineering

## Abstract

AbstractRecent progress in
engineering highly promising biocatalysts
has
increasingly involved machine learning methods. These methods leverage
existing experimental and simulation data to aid in the discovery
and annotation of promising enzymes, as well as in suggesting beneficial
mutations for improving known targets. The field of machine learning
for protein engineering is gathering steam, driven by recent success
stories and notable progress in other areas. It already encompasses
ambitious tasks such as understanding and predicting protein structure
and function, catalytic efficiency, enantioselectivity, protein dynamics,
stability, solubility, aggregation, and more. Nonetheless, the field
is still evolving, with many challenges to overcome and questions
to address. In this Perspective, we provide an overview of ongoing
trends in this domain, highlight recent case studies, and examine
the current limitations of machine learning-based methods. We emphasize
the crucial importance of thorough experimental validation of emerging
models before their use for rational protein design. We present our
opinions on the fundamental problems and outline the potential directions
for future research.Keywords: activity, artificial intelligence, biocatalysis, deep learning, protein design


## Introduction


Biocatalysis is a promising
field that offers diverse possibilities
for creating sustainable and environmentally friendly solutions in
various industries. Its potential stems from its ability to mimic
and harness the power of nature using cells and enzymes that have
evolved over millions of years to perform specific chemical reactions
with high efficiency. This makes it possible to transform chemical
compounds selectively and efficiently, providing an alternative to
traditional chemical catalysis, which often requires harsh conditions
and toxic chemicals.1 Biocatalysts could
therefore be valuable in the production of fine chemicals, pharmaceuticals,
and food ingredients as well as in the development of sustainable
processes for the production of energy and materials.2 In addition, biocatalysis is an exciting area of research
and development with great promise for the future because of the potential
to unlock new solutions for diverse challenges by providing green
alternatives to traditional chemical processes, new energy sources,
and tools for improving the overall efficiency of industrial processes
or biological removal of recalcitrant waste.3−5 It is also a
highly interdisciplinary research area that makes heavy use of advanced
experimental techniques and computational methods.6

Many research fields are undergoing a gradual transition
from near-exclusive
reliance on experimental work to hybrid approaches that incorporate
computational simulations and data-driven methods.7−9 In the past,
researchers would accumulate observations from individual experiments
and use the resulting data to formulate fundamental rules. They then
created simulations based on these rules to better understand the
system under investigation. As computational power has increased,
researchers have been able to shift toward data-driven methods that
rely on machine learning (ML, see the glossary in Table 1 for terms in bold)
algorithms to deduce rules directly from data.10,11 This transition has made it possible to efficiently and comprehensively
analyze large and complex data sets that are often generated by high-throughput
technologies. Particularly, very powerful deep learning algorithms are finding a wide range of applications in life sciences
and will be discussed in great detail in this Perspective. While experimental
science and computational simulations still play essential roles,
the trend toward data-driven methods will likely continue as technology
and data collection methods evolve further.7


## Glossary of Terms Used Frequently
in the Context of Machine Learning for Enzyme Engineeringa


Focusing on their meaning in
the context of this Perspective. The terms from this table are highlighted
in bold upon their first usage in the text.

This paradigm shift is illustrated by the exponentially
growing
number of scientific articles describing the use of machine learning
for protein engineering (Figure 1). The trend toward data-driven methods is expected
to continue as technological advances allow us to accumulate, deposit,
and reuse biological and biochemical data more effectively. This is
being facilitated by initiatives such as the FAIR principles, which promote the findability, accessibility, interoperability,
and reusability of data, and the European Open Science Cloud, which
is designed to promote best practices in handling data.12 These large-scale initiatives are expected to
accelerate the adoption of data-driven methods by making it easier
for researchers to access, use, and share existing data and ensuring
that these data are of high quality.

The trend in the use of machine learning
in the literature on protein
engineering. The graph shows the ratio of publications mentioning
“machine learning” and “protein engineering”
to all papers mentioning “protein engineering” in their
title, abstract, or keywords, based on the Scopus database. This trend
illustrates the increasing attention ML is receiving as a generally
applicable and useful technology for protein engineering.

This Perspective focuses on the application of
machine learning
to protein engineering, which means improving the properties of biocatalysts
by optimizing their sequences and tertiary structures using molecular
biology techniques. Time-wise, we will primarily cover the period
since our previous review on the same topic, published in 2019.13 As for particular areas, we will be focusing
mainly on the applications regarding engineering by mutating known
proteins rather than designing proteins de novo.
While readers with a particular interest in de novo design might also find this Perspective helpful, as we cover many
techniques common for various protein design tasks, for particular
details on de novo design, such as deep generative
modeling, we refer to other reviews.14−16 We will also
introduce high-level concepts from machine learning to familiarize
the reader with a broader context and will not cover in depth technical
aspects such as specifics of various neural network architectures.
We refer the readers to several excellent recent reviews on those
topics.10,17−23 We will consider new methods from a user’s perspective. We
find this important because the methods presented in research papers,
while being exciting and innovative, often have only a limited impact
if the wider community cannot quickly and easily adopt them. Moreover,
we will draw inspiration from other domains, as we believe that identifying
parallels between tasks in different fields can accelerate the development
of more powerful and practically useful methods. In particular, by
examining how solutions have been developed in other disciplines,
we can learn effective ways of making methods and software tools applicable
to a broader range of users.24,25

This paper is
organized as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews the basics of machine learning
and underlines the similarities and differences between data related
to proteins and data in other domains. Section 3 provides a comprehensive review of machine
learning in protein engineering and highlights recent progress in
the field. In section 4, we examine a series of exciting recent case studies in which machine
learning methods were applied to create new enzyme designs for use
in the laboratory and in practical applications. In section 5, we identify gaps in the
field that remain to be filled. Finally, in section 6, we investigate what inspiration we can
draw from other disciplines to bring ML-based enzyme design to a new
level.


## Principles of Machine Learning


As some
of our readers might be unfamiliar with machine learning
(ML), we start with a brief introduction to the topic. We will cover
the basics of ML-based pipelines and vocabulary, highlight similarities
between protein engineering and other domains from a ML perspective,
outline the main traits that distinguish protein data from other data
types regularly used in ML, and summarize the challenges of performing
ML with protein data.


## Machine Learning Basics


Machine learning
is often seen as a subcategory of artificial intelligence (AI). Its primary purpose is to learn patterns directly from available
data and use the learned patterns to generate predictions for new
data. Its main difference from other methods for modeling a system’s
behavior, such as quantum mechanical calculations, is that ML does
not rely on hard-coded rules to make predictions. Instead, ML models
are mathematical functions that depend on generic parameters whose
values are obtained (learned) through optimization using available
data and an optimization criterion, the so-called loss function.

Since the final model is derived from the input data, careful
data collection is vitally important for machine learning. In particular,
any biases, measurement noise, and imbalances must be recognized and
accounted for. Moreover, as ML is based on mathematical functions,
every data point in a data set typically needs to be represented as
a vector of numbers that are commonly referred to as features. Features may be obtained by simple encoding of the raw data, e.g., end-to-end learning and one-hot
encoding, but they may also represent more involved quantities
derived from the raw data. For example, when predicting solubility
from a protein sequence, the features may be simple amino acid counts,
propensities of different residues to form secondary structures, conservation
scores of proteins, or variables representing aggregated physicochemical
properties.26 Choosing informative and
discriminating features that provide relevant information about the
underlying pattern in the data is crucial in ML because the features
are the only data characteristics that the algorithm will exploit
during training and when making predictions based on future inputs.

Several different categories of ML problems exist. In supervised
learning problems, the goal is to predict a particular property
(known as a label) for each data point (Figure 2A). For example, if we were seeking to predict
protein solubility, each data point could be labeled “soluble”
or “insoluble” based on experimental results. Data points
can have multiple labels, so a given protein could have the labels
“soluble”, “from a thermophilic organism”,
and “globular”. Labels can form a set of classes or
fall within a range of numerical values, giving rise to two subtypes
of supervised learning problems: classification problems involving
labels with no inherent order (e.g., “soluble”
or “insoluble”) and regression problems involving labels
corresponding to numerical values (e.g., protein
yields). In contrast, the goal in unsupervised learning problems is to identify patterns in unlabeled data. Unsupervised
learning techniques include clustering algorithms and data compression
or projection methods, such as principal component analysis (Figure 2B). Semisupervised
learning problems are those where the amount of labeled data
is limited but there is an abundance of unlabeled data available.
The unlabeled data are used to learn a general distribution of the
data, aiding the learning of a supervised model. For example, all
the data can be clustered by an unsupervised algorithm, and the unlabeled
samples can be automatically labeled based on the labels present in
the cluster, leading to the enhancement of the data set for supervised
learning, which can benefit its performance despite the lower quality
of labeling.

Four main categories of machine learning methods. (a) Supervised
learning methods use labels. For example, each protein in a
data set might be labeled “soluble” or “insoluble”,
and the model would then aim to find the optimal decision boundary
between these two classes in the feature space. The learned boundary
is then used to make predictions about new data for which labels are
unavailable. (b) Unsupervised learning methods typically
find patterns, e.g., clusters or groups) in unlabeled
data. Examples include clustering enzymes into subfamilies or grouping
them into a dendrogram. (c) Generative models learn the
distribution of the training data to generate new instances corresponding
to that distribution. Models of this type include diffusion models,
which are trained to denoise synthetically noised inputs. The trained
models can then be applied to random noise on the input to create
a sample resembling the training data, e.g., a new
protein structure. (d) Self-supervised learning methods
transform an unsupervised problem into a supervised problem, for example,
by masking a part of a sequence or structure (red dashed loop) and
then predicting the masked information (red loop). Such proxy tasks
enable the model to learn important characteristics of the underlying
data and can lead the model to perform well even on different tasks.

The boundary between supervised and unsupervised
machine learning
has been blurred by the emergence of methods that can create labels
synthetically. For example, in a data compression method, the label
might be the input itself and the algorithm may impose constraints
(e.g., a bottleneck in the architecture) that force
the model to learn a more compact way of representing the data and
their distribution. The algorithms that aim to capture the data distribution
to generate new samples belong to a class of ML models called generative
models. The most recent examples of this class include diffusion
models, which have recently been used to generate protein backbone
structures27,28 and predict the binding of a
flexible ligand to a protein29 (Figure 2C). In diffusion
models, synthetic training data are generated by gradually noising
true data (X0) in a stepwise manner to
ultimately obtain a maximally noised sample (XT). The sequences of increasingly noisy data are then reversed
and used to train a model to denoise each individual step by having
the (less noisy) sample Xt-1 serve as a “label” for the (more noisy) following
sample Xt. For more details on diffusion
generative models and their applications in bioinformatics, see the
recent review.30 Alternatively, we can
avoid the need for labels by masking a part of the input, e.g., a residue in a protein sequence or structure,31−33 and training a model that will predict the masked part. In other
words, the original data (e.g., the amino acid that
was masked) are treated as the label for the corresponding data point.
Such approaches belong to the methods of self-supervised learning (Figure 2D) and are
currently attracting considerable attention because of their great
success in large language models; it turns out that this “self-supervision”
approach allows algorithms to learn useful characteristics of the
data, such as grammar and semantics in the case of natural language
models. The following sections present some applications of self-supervised
learning in the enzymology domain.

In supervised learning, underfitting and overfitting are two critical
concepts that must always be considered. Underfitting
refers to a situation in which either the selected class of models
is insufficient to approximate patterns in the available data, the regularization is too strong, or the parameters of the training
process such as the duration of the training or the learning
rate were inappropriate. As a result, the model fails to capture
the relationship between the input and output and has a high training
error. Conversely, overfitting happens when a model has too many degrees
of freedom, allowing it to start fitting noise in the training data
during the training process. This leads to poor generalization and a significant drop in performance when the model is applied
to new inputs. Robust evaluation of trained models is therefore crucial
in machine learning to obtain feedback on the training process and
develop improved training protocols or model hyperparameters.

The best practice in machine learning is to split the available
data into three disjoint subsets: a training set, a validation set,
and a test set. A model learns the underlying patterns within the
data by fitting its parameters to the training set. The validation
set is provided to the model at certain stages of the training for
basic evaluation, and the results of these evaluations are used to
select the model’s hyperparameters. Finally, the test set is
used to get a realistic estimate of the model’s performance
and is therefore only used once training has been completed and the
final values for the hyperparameters have been set. Since the model
does not see the test set during the training process, the model’s
performance, when applied to this “new” data set, should
be similar to that achieved with the test set if the test set accurately
represents the general distribution of the studied data.

The
choice of evaluation metric depends on the task at hand. Classification
problems are mainly evaluated based on model accuracy, i.e., the ratio of correct predictions to the
number of total predictions. Regression problems are typically evaluated
based on the difference between the predicted and ground truth labels,
so popular metrics include measures of the correlation between these
labels as well as the mean squared error (MSE) and related metrics
such as the root-mean-square error (RMSE). More complex problems often
require customized metrics. For instance, in a protein structure prediction
task, one might use the MSE between the predicted and actual locations
of Cα atoms, which can be expressed using a fixed coordinate
system (global alignment) or in terms of the local coordinates of
each residue (local alignment). Both metrics indicate how well a predicted
structure aligns with the corresponding actual structure.


## Parallels between Machine Learning Tasks in
Biocatalysis and Those in Other Domains


One of the strengths
of machine learning is its universality, as the algorithms used for
protein engineering tasks are similar to those used in other domains.
Therefore, scientists working with protein data can reuse and build
upon existing solutions from other fields, such as natural language
processing, computer vision, and network analysis.

Natural language
processing (NLP) is a field of computer science that aims to teach
computers how to understand and handle natural languages. New ML techniques
have enabled great advances in this field in recent years. For instance,
a common task in NLP is to generate semantically and grammatically
correct sentences. In protein engineering, the strings of amino acids
representing primary sequences can be regarded as words constructed
from an alphabet of twenty letters representing the canonical amino
acids. These words can represent secondary structures or other motifs
that can be combined in meaningful ways to create sentences in the
language of protein structure that correspond to functional proteins.
Another common task in NLP is the assignment of labels to individual
words (e.g., to predict lexical categories or identify
relevant information) or phrases (e.g., for sentiment
analysis). This data structure resembles that of annotated protein
data sets with labels representing protein stability, binding affinity,
specificity, or other characteristics.34 Moreover, the complexities of the relationships between protein
sequence, structure, and function are reminiscent of those in human
languages, prompting researchers to adapt transformer-based large language models used in NLP to protein engineering tasks.35

Another field of computer science that
has benefited greatly from
recent advances in ML is computer vision, and techniques developed
for use in this field have also found applications in the study of
the protein structure. For example, protein structures can be converted
to arrays of voxels (3D pixels) via the application of a discrete
grid. The resulting representations are similar to those of volumetric
3D images, enabling the application of ML architectures, such as convolutional
neural networks, that were originally designed to process image data.
These networks learn representations through convolution and hierarchical
aggregation and have recently been used to predict protein mutation
landscapes,31 protein–ligand binding
affinity,36 and the interactions of proteins
with water molecules.37 Denoising diffusion
probabilistic models are another class of computer vision models that
have been applied in protein structure prediction. They are trained
to denoise existing samples, which allows them to generate novel samples
by morphing random noise. This has led to major breakthroughs in image
generation and the emergence of the highly successful models, such
as DALL-E 238 or Stable Diffusion.39 In protein science, such models have been used
to perform fast protein–ligand binding,29 generate new small-molecule ligands40 and linkers,41 and perform de novo design of large proteins.27,28

The parallels between images and protein structures can be
further
exploited by adapting techniques developed for video analysis to predict
protein dynamics. For example, a trajectory generated in a molecular
dynamics simulation can be regarded as a temporal sequence of 3D images.
This makes protein dynamics analysis similar to video processing and
implies that video methods for event detection42 can be applied to molecular dynamics trajectories to detect
events such as the opening of a tunnel.43 Video processing techniques can thus be adapted to clarify a protein’s
function by analyzing the movement of individual atoms or groups of
atoms within a protein structure in a manner similar to the movement
of objects or groups of objects in a video. Moreover, there have been
remarkable advances in ML techniques for video synthesis44−46 that could inspire new methods for capturing and synthesizing protein
dynamics.

Finally, one more domain is relevant to protein engineering:
network
analysis, which involves studying the properties and structures of
interconnected elements. Network analysis techniques have been used
successfully to study diverse social and biological networks, including
the development of Covid-19-related sentiment on social networks47 and protein–protein interaction networks.48 Interactions between proteins or between a protein
and a ligand can be represented as networks (graphs) in which nodes
correspond to proteins and ligands while edges correspond to biological
relationships between them. Once such a network has been defined,
link prediction or community detection methods can be applied.49 Alternatively, a protein structure can be represented
as a network where nodes correspond to residues or individual atoms
and edges correspond to inter-residue interactions or interatomic
bonds. This makes it possible to use graph-based ML algorithms for
tasks such as predicting protein function, solubility, or toxicity.50,51 Moreover, data on protein interactomes and the structures of small
molecules have been used to drive theoretical research on graph-based
ML: the best-established benchmark for graph learning, OGB, includes
multiple biochemical data sets of this type.52


## Challenges of Machine Learning for Protein
Data


As discussed above, there are striking similarities
between protein engineering tasks and other ML domains, including
natural language processing, computer vision, and network analysis.
However, protein data also present unique challenges related to the
representation of proteins, the construction of labeled data sets,
and the establishment of robust training protocols.

The choice
of protein representation is a key step in all protein-related computational
tasks. Proteins can be represented at different levels of detail,
from a discrete and accurate 1D representation of their amino acid
sequence to a continuous and less accurate 3D representation of every
atom position, including or excluding chemical bonds. The selected
representation determines the type and amount of information available
to the computational model and the range of applicable model architectures.

The go-to representation of a protein sequence is a string (word)
constructed using an alphabet of 20 amino acids (letters). The length
of the string equals the number of residues, and the nth character encodes the amino acid at the nth position in the protein sequence. In silico, the amino acids are typically represented using one-hot encoding.
When the amount of data available for training is not enough for end-to-end
learning, one-hot encoding of sequences can further be transformed
into values corresponding to specific physicochemical characteristics
of amino acids, e.g., using AA indices.53 These indices provide additional information
and interpretability to the pipeline, although they were shown to
perform on par with random vectors for some tasks.54,55 Another strategy to enrich the protein sequence representation is
to include evolutionary information using a multiple sequence
alignment (MSA) instead of a single protein sequence. This
evolutionary information is valuable in various tasks, most notably
in structure prediction because the covariance of different residue
positions in the sequence can be related to the residues’ spatial
proximity.56

The options for representing
a protein’s structure are more
varied; representations may include all atoms, only selected chemical
elements (e.g., all atoms except hydrogens), or just
key components of residues (e.g., the α-carbons).
Moreover, they may include different types of information about these
atoms and/or residues. Ideally, to enable data-efficient model training,
structural representations should be invariant to rotation, translation,
and reflection. However, straightforward representations based on
the 3D coordinates of the residues (atoms) lack this property. It
is therefore common to represent protein structure using an inter-residue
or interatomic distance matrix in which each row and column is assigned
to a specific residue (or atom) of the protein and the value of each
matrix entry is equal to the distance between the corresponding residues
(atoms). Such a matrix is necessarily symmetric; therefore, it is
common to take the upper (or lower) triangular part and convert it
into a 1D vector for processing, e.g., by a neural
network. While this representation is rotationally and translationally
invariant, it is also inherently redundant, as its spatial complexity
is quadratic with respect to the number of residues (atoms).

Graph-based protein representations have recently attracted considerable
attention.57 A graph consists of a set
of nodes linked by a set of edges. The nodes typically represent residues,
atoms, or groups of spatially close atoms, while the edges usually
correspond to chemical bonds, spatial proximity (contacts) between
the nodes, or both.58 Graph-based protein
representations are very flexible because the definition of the nodes
and edges can be tailored to specific tasks and they can be made equivariant to rotation, translation, and reflection.59 A convenient definition of the nodes and edges
can also introduce an inductive bias that improves the
model performance. For example, edges corresponding to chemical bonds
can guide a model toward learning chemical knowledge more rapidly
or with less data than would otherwise be needed. Graph neural network
(GNN) architectures have recently achieved state-of-the-art performance
in multiple protein-related tasks, as exemplified by the DeepFRI60 and HIGH-PPI61 methods
for predicting protein function and protein–protein interactions,
respectively. Special graph-based protein representations, such as
point clouds (no edges) or complete graphs (a full set of edges),
are especially convenient for processing using powerful transformer
models.62,63

A more general approach to protein
representation is to directly
learn the representation by a deep learning model, a direction that
is currently on the rise in biology.64 Its
aim is to remove the suboptimality of human-made choices by inferring
the representation parameters from existing data. Furthermore, it
is often possible to learn such a representation through self-supervised
training, i.e., without the need for annotated data.
These representations can be obtained from the sequence data, e.g., as done by the ESM (“Evolutionary Scale Modeling”)
language models,65−67 as well as from large structural data sets, e.g., as done by GearNet.68 More
and more models combine both sources of data, e.g., ESM-GearNet.32

Obtaining appropriately
labeled data sets can be challenging when
seeking to apply ML in enzyme engineering because there is often a
trade-off between data quality and quantity when selecting methods
for acquiring experimental data. Most reliable biochemical methods
using purpose-built instruments can only provide data for small numbers
of protein variants69 and are thus generally
insufficient for representative sampling of vast mutational spaces.
Conversely, high-throughput methods such as Deep Mutational Scanning
(DMS) are prone to data quality issues69 and face a throughput bottleneck in the case of enzymes whose screening
is considerably slower than sequencing.70

The process of compiling new data sets from multiple sources
can
be complicated by the inconsistency of conventions in protein research.
These inconsistencies include the differing biases of various experimental
tools, the use of different distributions for data normalization,
and inconsistent definitions of quantities such as stability, solubility,
and enzyme activity. All of these can introduce errors into constructed
data sets, for example, by causing contradictory labels to be applied
to the same protein. Protein data may also contain biases introduced
by the design strategy. For example, alanine tends to be overrepresented
in mutational data due to the widely used alanine scanning technique.71 It is important to consider these biases during
data set construction and when interpreting model outputs since the
composition of the training set significantly affects the space of
patterns explored by the model.

A significant amount of protein
data has been gathered over the
years. However, much of these data are proprietary and thus inaccessible
to the academic community. In addition, publicly available data sets
are often published in an unstructured way, which limits their usability.
While large language models such as GPT-3,72 GPT-4,73 or BioGPT74 are remarkably effective at summarizing text on large scales,
mining relevant data from publications still requires considerable
human effort.

Some ML packages, e.g., TorchProtein,75 offer preprocessed data sets for various protein
science tasks, making protein research more accessible to ML experts
from other domains. Other packages, such as PyPEF76 provide frameworks for the integration of simpler ML models
together with special encodings derived from the AAindex database
of physicochemical and biochemical properties of amino acids.53 Despite this progress, the development of ML
models for protein data requires a certain level of biochemistry domain
knowledge to account for the specifics of protein data absent in other
application areas of ML. These specifics include the evolutionary
relationships and structural similarities between proteins. Models
produced without the benefit of such expertise may lack practical
utility due to data handling errors.

One common type of data
handling error is data leakage between
data splits. The training, validation, and test sets should not share
the same (or nearly the same) data points because such overlaps could
lead to over estimating the model’s performance on new data,
compromising the model’s evaluation. In some data sets, all
of the data points are distinct enough that randomly splitting the
available data into disjoint sets is a viable strategy. However, more
complex splitting strategies are often needed when dealing with protein
data to avoid problems such as evolutionary data leakage.77 It may also be important to consider multiple
levels of separation when dealing with protein data, e.g., consisting of mutations and their effects. For example, one might
want to ensure that the same substitutions, positions, or proteins
do not appear in the training and test sets. Defining protein similarity
is also a challenging task for which multiple strategies exist. Many
of these strategies involve clustering proteins based on sequence
identity or similarity thresholds and then ensuring that all members
of a given cluster are assigned to the same set when splitting the
data. This strategy is particularly useful for constructing labeled
data sets of protein structures because such data sets are primarily
sourced from large redundant databases such as PDB78 (see Table S2). However, clustering
in the sequence space can be insufficient in some cases. For example,
distantly related proteins may have very similar active site geometries
even though their sequence homology is low.79 Clustering may thus be performed at the level of the structural
representation instead. While such strategies have only rarely been
used in the past, they may become more common due to the emergence
of new tools for protein structure searching such as Foldseek.80


## Protein Engineering Tasks
Solved by Machine
Learning


This section provides a brief overview of the protein
engineering
tasks that have already drawn the attention of machine learning developers.
The first of these tasks is functional annotation, which is important
because the overwhelming majority of sequences in protein databases
remain unannotated and in silico prediction is necessary
to keep pace with the exponentially growing number of deposited sequences.
We will then cover the available labeled data sets and state-of-the-art
ML tools for predicting mutational effects in proteins, as well as
strategies for protein design based on their predictions. In addition,
we will review published methods for leveraging unlabeled protein
sequence and structure data sets to help guide protein engineering.
Finally, we conclude with examples showing how ML models of protein
dynamics can facilitate the selection of promising mutations.


## Functional Annotation of Proteins


Knowledge of protein
functions is fundamental for protein engineering
pipelines. For instance, in protein fitness optimization, scientists
start from a characterized wild-type sequence with some degree of
the desired function.81−83 Likewise, in biocatalysis, one needs to know the
function of enzymes to assemble a biosynthetic pathway from plausible
enzymatic reactions.84,85

Traditionally, scientists
have characterized the functions of proteins via laborious, time-consuming,
and costly wet lab experiments. However, owing to high-throughput
DNA sequencing, the exponentially growing repertoire of protein sequences
is reaching numbers far beyond the capabilities of experimental functional
annotation; for example, the Big Fantastic Database (BFD, Table S2) contains 2.5 billion sequences to date.
Functional annotation is particularly important for enzymes. A broad-level
annotation (e.g., enzyme family) can be achieved
relatively easily by sequence homology and by searching for protein
domain motifs, but detailed annotation of enzyme substrates and products
currently requires experimental characterization. To accelerate this
process, a substantial recent effort has been dedicated to the development
of novel computational methods for functional annotation.

The
developed computational methods heavily rely on data sets of
previously characterized enzymatic functions for training. For example,
information on protein families and domains is often sourced from
the Pfam,86 SUPERFAMILY,87 or CATH88 databases. Enzymatic
activity data often come from databases such as Rhea,89 BRENDA,90 SABIO-RK,91 PathBank,92 ATLAS,93 and MetaNetX.94 The
ENZYME database under the Expasy infrastructure95 provides the Enzyme Commission (EC) numbers, the most commonly
used nomenclature for enzymatic functions. EC numbers are a hierarchical
classification system categorizing enzymatic reactions at four levels
of detail, with the fourth level being the most detailed. An EC number
groups together proteins with the same enzymatic activity regardless
of the reaction mechanisms.96 The data
from the above-listed databases have also been post-processed and
organized into data sets such as ECREACT97 or EnzymeMap,98 which should further
facilitate the development of computational models.

The models
for enzymatic activity prediction typically use enzyme
amino acid sequences as input, as the goal is to directly annotate
the outputs of high-throughput DNA sequencing. The incorporation of
the structural inputs, facilitated by the recent breakthroughs in
structure prediction,67,99 is still to be explored more
by the community. The outputs of these models generally fall into
three categories based on the resolution of predictions. First, the
most general models predict protein families and domains. Second,
the EC class-predictive models provide a more detailed estimation
of enzymatic activity. Finally, the most comprehensive picture of
enzymatic activity requires models for predicting an enzyme’s
substrates and corresponding products. Several recent deep learning
models predict protein families and domains.100,101 Although such models are crucial for studying proteins, they have
only a limited applicability in enzymatic activity prediction, as
a single protein family can combine enzymes catalyzing different reactions.102 To meet the needs of protein engineering, the
models predicting the EC numbers appear to be more relevant, as they
can capture the catalytic activities.

Over the years, the community
attempted to predict EC numbers using
multiple sequence alignment and position-specific scoring matrices
(PSSM) or hidden Markov model (HMM) profiles,103−105k-nearest neighbor-based classifiers,104−108 support vector machines (SVM),105,109−112 random forests,113,114 and deep learning.60,115−119 Most methods approached the prediction of EC numbers as a classification
problem, which led to poor performance on the under-represented EC
categories. The recent deep-learning-based method119 tackled the EC number prediction via a contrastive learning
approach, training a Siamese neural network on top of sequence embeddings from a pretrained protein language model.66 The resulting predictive algorithm, CLEAN, can
better identify enzyme sequences that belong to any EC category, including
underrepresented ones. CLEAN achieved state-of-the-art performance
in EC number prediction in silico, and it was experimentally
validated in vitro using high-performance liquid
chromatography–mass spectrometry coupled with enzyme kinetic
analysis on a set of previously misannotated halogenase enzyme sequences.

EC class prediction enables downstream applications such as retrobiosynthesis.85 For instance, planning of biosynthesis has been
tackled by predicting the chemical structure of the substrate and
the required enzyme EC number from the provided enzymatic product
using a transformer-based neural network.97 Several other published deep learning models aspired to estimate
the substrate of an enzymatic reaction based on its product.120,121 Such models can be used to prioritize enzyme selection based on
the EC class or the substrate/product pair. However, the assignment
of a specific enzyme sequence (i.e., not only the
EC class) to a desired reaction remains a challenge for future development.

Recently, the first general models predicting interaction between
individual enzymes and substrates/products were published.122,123 These DL-based models take pairs of a protein sequence and a small
molecule as inputs and predict their possible interaction. Unfortunately,
none of the general substrate–enzyme interaction models were
validated in wet lab experiments. Furthermore, in Kroll et al. the
authors admit poor generalization of the model to out-of-sample substrates.123 Moreover, enzyme-family-specific models were
shown to outperform the general models in predicting the enzyme–substrate
interactions.124 To sum up, the practical
applicability of general enzyme–substrate interaction models
has yet to be determined.


## Supervised Learning to
Predict the Effects
of Mutations


The ability to predict mutational effects on
various protein properties, such as solubility, stability, aggregation,
function, and enantioselectivity, is another desirable goal of protein
engineering. From the machine learning perspective, this implies having
a model that takes a reference protein and its variant as the input
and predicts the change in the studied property as the output. Intuitively,
this could be achieved by supervised learning on the labeled data
sets of wild-type proteins first (e.g., to predict
a solubility score, binding energy, or melting temperature of a given
protein), applying the trained model to independently predict labels
of the reference protein and its variant, and then taking the difference
between the two predicted scores. The attractiveness of this strategy
comes from large annotated data sets of wild-type proteins available
for training. For example, the Protein Structure Initiative125 generated a massive data set TargetTrack, often
used for protein solubility prediction.26 Additionally, the more recent Meltome Atlas of protein stability
obtained by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry126 was used for predicting melting temperatures.127 Our ongoing effort to predict highly valuable
melting temperatures solely from the protein sequence resulted in
the development of the TmProt software tool (https://loschmidt.chemi.muni.cz/tmprot/). Large labeled data sets usually provide enough training data for
powerful end-to-end deep learning.34,128,129 Nonetheless, when the training data set does not
contain mutations, a few substitutions will usually result in similar
predicted labels (e.g., solubility scores), in contrast
to dramatic changes often observed in experiments. Therefore, the
strategy of taking the difference between the predicted labels for
a reference protein and its variant typically fails to produce reliable
predictors for mutational effects.130

A more promising route is to use labeled mutational data sets for
training. This strategy has its own limitations, since such data sets
are not only scarce but also sparse in terms of the extent of the
mutational landscape that is probed (the sequence space grows exponentially
with the number of mutated residues) and biased toward several overrepresented
proteins.13,131 These barriers severely hinder
the use of ML, which relies heavily on the availability of good quality
data with a high coverage of the space of interest. Therefore, additional
data curation and processing, adjustments to training protocols, and
more thorough and critical data evaluations are typically needed.
Such efforts will be a crucial first step in establishing reliable
ML pipelines for predicting mutational effects.

The most abundant
and diverse mutational data come from general
biophysical characterizations that are performed routinely in most
protein engineering studies, including measurements of protein expressibility,
solubility, and stability. The major challenge when using such data
lies in collection and curation: measurements are scattered across
the literature and often reported ad hoc because
they are generally complementary to a study’s main results.132 This highlights the importance of establishing
and maintaining databases with protein annotations to facilitate data
discoverability and reuse. For example, we recently released SoluProtMutDB,133 which currently has almost 33 000 labeled
entries concerning mutational effects on the solubility and expression
of over 100 proteins. This database incorporates all of the data points
that were recently used to develop solubility predictors (Table 2), which achieved
correct prediction ratios of around 70%.133


## Recent Applications of Supervised
ML Tools in Prediction of the Effects of Mutations in Protein Engineeringa


N/A = not available.

Protein stability measurements are another type of
widely available
biophysical data that can be used in ML. Protein stability is typically
quantified in terms of the melting temperature (Tm) or the Gibbs free energy difference between the folded
and unfolded states (ΔΔG). Several protein
stability databases exist, including FireProtDB,158 ThermoMutDB,138 and ProThermDB,135 and their data have often been used to train
ML predictors that have achieved Pearson’s correlations of
up to 0.6 and RMSE values of 1.5 kcal/mol when applied to independent
test sets.159 Interestingly, these numbers
have barely changed over the past decade, indicating that a qualitative
paradigm shift might be needed to advance ML-based prediction of mutation-induced
protein stability changes.132 It is possible
that large new data sets could provide the necessary boost, and some
exciting studies collecting such data are already appearing: cDNA
display proteolysis was recently used to measure the thermodynamic
stability of around 850 000 single-point and selected double-point
mutants of 354 natural and 188 de novo designed protein
domains between 40 and 72 amino acids in length.140

Changes in catalytic activity upon mutation also
attract the attention
of ML researchers. Predicting mutational effects on enzyme activity
is more challenging than predicting protein stability and solubility
due to the enormous diversity of enzymatic mechanisms. One rich source
of such mutational data is large-scale deep mutational scanning.69 These experiments combine high-throughput screening
and sequencing and typically score protein variants by comparing their
abundance before and after a specific selection is applied. These
data sets provide comprehensive overviews of the local mutational
landscapes of various enzymes and are of significant value for ML
due to their unbiased mutant coverage. Several groups have already
assembled various deep mutational scanning (DMS) data sets for benchmarking
effect predictors,145,160−164 and we expect this trend to continue as more data sets appear. Notable
works of this type include the recently published activity landscapes
of the phosphatase,165 dihydrofolate reductase,166 DNA polymerase,167 and palmitoylethanolamide transferase.168

DMS can be applied to a wide range of enzyme functions due
to its
high flexibility with respect to selection procedures. However, its
high throughput comes at the cost of limiting the number of protein
targets that can be used in a study; often, only a single case is
examined. The desire to target multiple enzymes simultaneously motivated
the creation of another notable database of enzyme activity changes:
D3DistalMutation.169 It contains data derived
from UniProt annotations representing over 90 000 mutational
effects in 2130 enzymes. However, its potential in ML has not yet
been explored.

Other protein characteristics may also be used
as targets for protein
engineering and machine learning. These targets are often selected
based on the enzyme of interest and may include important functional
traits such as substrate specificity,149 enzyme enantioselectivity,170,171 kinetic constants,142−144 temperature sensitivity,172 or temperature
optima.147,148 In addition, several mutational data sets
that can be used for ML-based tools focusing on protein folding rates,
binding, and aggregation have been deposited in the VariBench benchmark
data set.173 Selected recent examples of
these tools are listed in Table 2. An overview of the described databases and data sets
is given in Table S2.


## Approaches to Design Mutations


While
tools for predicting effects of mutations have become increasingly
advanced in recent years, in their simple form, they can only provide
labels for a given substitution. However, the desired outcome of protein
engineering pipelines is to have a list of promising protein variants
for experimental validation. Therefore, even if a reliable ML-based
tool for predicting effects of substitutions is available, the problem
of suggesting promising hypothetical designs must be addressed. This
problem may become a major bottleneck, since even if the prediction
of single- or multiple-point mutational effects is fast, evaluating
all possible combinations of mutations remains unfeasible. Therefore,
there is a growing need for tools that simultaneously predict the
effects of mutations and reduce the search space, which is the focus
of this subsection.

A major challenge in the development of
such tools is finding ways to efficiently reduce the space of multipoint
mutants. In an analysis of nine case studies, Milton and coauthors
found that the effects of half of the multipoint mutations influencing
enzymatic properties could not be predicted using knowledge of the
corresponding single-point mutations, with the associated complexities
resulting from direct interactions between residues in some cases
and long-range interactions in others.174 This common nonadditive behavior, which is known as epistasis, has
prompted the development of ML models and combinatorial optimization
algorithms capable of scoring or searching multipoint mutants by design.
Several approaches discussed below have been proposed to overcome
this challenge, more on this topic can be found in a review.175

One such approach is to produce a library
of variants for screening
using reliable physics- and evolution-based tools. Even a time-consuming
preselection of promising hotspots can drastically reduce the computational
time of the downstream ML scoring and search.176 For example, HotSpot Wizard 3.0177 achieves robust selection of hotspots by using a number of sequence
and structure-based filters to identify mutable residues for which
mutation effects are then quantified using the well-established Rosetta
and FoldX tools. Another example is the FuncLib web server, which
computes promising single-point active-site mutations using evolutionary
conservation analysis and Rosetta-based stability calculations.178 This tool exhaustively models each combination
of mutants and ranks them by energy. Evolutionary information can
also be captured by ML-based models179 and
used to suggest promising substitutions, e.g., amino
acids with conditional likelihoods higher than the wild-type.180

Mathematical optimization methods can
generate promising protein
sequence candidates in silico by iteratively producing
new designs based on available ML scoring data (Figure 3). One group of such methods uses the ML
predictor as a black-box oracle to evaluate existing candidates. This
evaluation is then used to approximate the “fitness”
of sequences, which is in turn used to navigate the sequence landscape
and generate a new set of candidates using tools such as evolutionary
algorithms82,181 or simulated annealing.182 However, approximating complex mutational landscapes
using oracles representing estimated, simplifying distributions can
harm the optimization process and prevent the optimal solution from
being found.183 Adaptive sampling of the
design space can be used instead to obtain better results.81 Other alternatives are to use generative models184 or rely on so-called white-box optimization,
which involves using knowledge of a predictor’s internal workings
to find the optimal solution. For example, linear regression coefficients
can be used to suggest modifications (mutations) of the input that
alter the corresponding features in the desired direction. White-box
methods are discussed further in the context of explainable
AI in section 6.1.

Selected ML strategies for designing new enzyme variants. (a) In silico evolutionary combinatorial search for favorable
mutations. A machine learning predictor is used to iteratively evaluate
candidate mutations for some desired property, e.g., stability. The mutated amino acid in each step is underlined. (b)
Generation of favorable mutants. The machine learning tool directly
infers the sequence with high property values (e.g., stability) from a fitness landscape learned and captured in the
weights of the model during the training. (c) An active learning loop:
an ML predictor from (a) or (b) is used to (1) propose enzyme variants
that are (2) evaluated experimentally, and the resulting data are
used to (3) update the knowledge database. The ML model is then (4)
retrained on the updated knowledge database, and new variants are
designed.

While in silico optimization methods
enable the
iterative generation of promising designs, they rely entirely on the
ability of a predictor to correctly score any given point in a mutational
landscape, which might be an unrealistically strong assumption. A
possible alternative (albeit one that is more costly and has lower
throughput) is to directly incorporate experimental validation into
the optimization loop. This experimental input can guide search algorithms
to more promising parts of the mutational landscape in a manner that
is akin to directed evolution. While advanced search methods of this
type have previously been used to improve traditional directed evolution,82,182 they do not fully exploit the potential of experimentally characterizing
intermediate variants. ML-based active learning methods
accelerate directed evolution by iteratively extracting knowledge
from all characterized variants and selecting the most promising ones.185 By relying on the new experimental data, only
a limited number of training samples can be expected,186 confining the choice of ML models to those
with a lower number of parameters, such as multilayer perceptrons (MLP) with as few as two layers.187 A
recent advance in the area of active learning is the development of
GFlowNets,188 networks designed to suggest
diverse and accurate candidates in a machine–expert loop to
accelerate scientific discovery. Studies using such networks have
demonstrated their potential for designing small molecules;189 however, the utility for the design of proteins
remains to be reliably demonstrated.

Powerful design techniques
for the exploration of variants of enzymes
and other proteins often rely not only on combining experimental and in silico techniques but also on combining multiple in silico approaches and sometimes different ML techniques.
For example, focused training ML-assisted directed evolution (ftMLDE)186 combines unsupervised and supervised training
approaches by using unsupervised clustering to construct a training
set for supervised classifiers. These classifiers are then used to
select promising mutants with tools such as CLADE 2.0.190 Similarly, unsupervised learning on millions
of sequences was used to obtain a protein representation called UniRep,191 which was further tuned in an unsupervised
manner to obtained eUniRep (evotuned UniRep) for proteins related
to the target sequence, leading to an informative set of features
for proteins in general as well as for the target in particular. Such
representation enabled data-efficient supervised learning of a model
for guiding in silico evolution.192 Alternatively, an unsupervised “probability density
model” has been used to produce an “evolutionary density
score”, a feature that was then used to augment a small number
of labeled data points on which a light model was trained in a supervised
manner. Interestingly, such an approach was shown to outperform the
supervised fine-tuning of the probability density model
pretrained in an unsupervised manner.193 Another approach194 combines self-supervised
large protein language models with a supervised structure-to-sequence
predictor in a new and more general framework called LM-design that
is claimed to advance the state of the art in predicting a protein
sequence corresponding to a starting backbone structure, sometimes
called “inverse folding”. While inverse folding does
not explicitly search the mutational landscape, it can be used to
identify promising mutations by inputting an existing protein structure
and a partially masked sequence and using the inverse folding tool
to propose amino acids for the masked parts.


## Leveraging
Unlabeled Data Sets to Score Mutations


Over the past decade, large language models (LLM)
have become popular tools for solving NLP problems ranging from language
translation to sentiment analysis.195 This
major paradigm shift was driven by the realization that even unlabeled
data contain useful information: the distributional hypothesis suggests
that the meaning of words can be deduced by analyzing how often and
with what partner words they appear in various texts.196 Analogously, in biology, we can regard proteins
as sequences based on “the grammar of the language of life”,
which implies that the distribution of amino acids at specific locations
can provide valuable insights that could be used to help predict the
effects of substitutions on protein function, thereby reducing the
reliance on external data sources.66 For
example, Elnaggar et al. showed that the embeddings generated by a
LLM, when used as input features, can effectively facilitate the development
of small supervised models whose predictive power rivals that of state-of-the-art
methods relying on evolutionary information obtained from MSAs.197 Additionally, the protein language model ESM-2
was recently trained on protein sequences from the UniRef database
to predict 15% of masked amino acids in a given sequence.67 This made it possible to directly leverage sequence
information to greatly improve B-cell epitope prediction198 without a supplementary MSA. The inherent attention
mechanism of ESM-2 can also be used to facilitate protein structure
prediction.67 We provide more examples
in Table 3. Furthermore,
the embeddings obtained from the language models, such as ESM-1b,65 ESM-2,67 ProtT5,197 and ProtTrans,199 have become a popular way of representing sequential data, making
pretrained ESM models a frequent subject for transfer learning. The transfer of knowledge from these models has been tackled by
fine-tuning the pretrained weights,197,200 by training
models solely on top of the learned embeddings (keeping the pretrained
weights fixed),197 and also by introducing
adapter modules201 between the trained
layers for parameter-efficient fine-tuning.202 The power of the learned embeddings can also be witnessed in a completely
unsupervised setting. More specifically, the ESM-1v66 model was demonstrated to accurately score protein variants
by relying solely on the wild-type amino acid probabilities learned
by the protein language model during pretraining without any subsequent
fine-tuning.


## Some Recent Self-Supervised ML Models
for Protein Engineeringa


N/A = not available

Large deep-learning models are impressively capable
of learning
general protein properties. For the cases in which a detailed understanding
of a specific protein or protein family is required rather than general
patterns that hold across different protein families, sequence-based
models that can learn distributional patterns from a single MSA are
available. MSAs have already proven to be a rich source of evolutionary
information, e.g., for identifying functionally important
conserved regions, insertions, or deletions to clarify the mechanisms
driving sequence divergence.

Analyses of evolutionary data and
comparisons of assigned probabilities
for mutant and wild-type sequences have also shown that ML-based models
can predict the effects of mutations in deep mutational scanning experiments
more accurately than established methods based on evolutionary data.66 For example, excellent protein structure prediction
performance was achieved by combining MSA inputs with an advanced
transformer architecture.99,210,216 In addition, Xie et al. used the maximum entropy (MaxEnt) principle
to infer statistical energy from homologous sequences143 and found that the inferred statistical energy
of active site residues correlated significantly with enzyme activity,
whereas that of residues distant from the active site correlated with
protein stability. Hsu et al. observed that a hybrid linear regression
model combining the evolutionary density score from MSA-based ML models
with labeled one-hot encoded protein sequence data sets demonstrated
superior performance in a range of protein fitness prediction tasks,
even for the sizes of the labeled data sets in the range of 48–240
data points.193 A similar effect for small
data sets of 50–250 data points was reported by Illig et al.217 Ding et al. showed that variational autoencoders
can capture phylogenetic relationships in the geometry of the latent
space of an MSA and further demonstrated that the free energies of
sequences assigned by the latent model can be used to predict mutation-induced
changes in stability.218 Building on these
findings, the geometric structure of a latent space was recently used
to guide the design of a haloalkane dehalogenase.219 In addition, by exploring the latent manifold underlying
the sequence information, we can uncover dependencies that may not
be readily apparent in the raw latent space embeddings.220

Despite its advantages, MSAs also have
some drawbacks. First,
it can be difficult to create an MSA that contains enough evolutionarily
relevant sequences to establish strong patterns at key amino acid
positions. Second, the creation of an MSA is often seen as something
of a craft rather than a systematic procedure, and the alignment process
can be sensitive to user choices, including the choice of substitution
matrices, gap penalties, and the number of iterations. Poor choices
may produce an MSA with improperly aligned residues because too few
iterations were performed during the alignment process or because
a significant number of gaps were introduced (particularly at the
beginning and end of the alignment), necessitating additional preprocessing
and trimming of the MSA to achieve optimal results. Moreover, aligning
new sequences to an MSA can be a challenging task that requires careful
consideration of the alignment parameters and sequence properties.
Despite these challenges, MSAs remain a powerful source of information
for studying the relationships and evolutionary history of biological
sequences.

Recent studies have also explored the opportunities
provided by
examining patterns at two contrasting scales within the protein sequence
space: general patterns in the large universe of protein sequences
and local distributions of sequence patterns in specific protein families.
These works have combined large pretrained models with lightweight,
easily retrainable components for efficient family-specific adaptation.
For example, Sevgen et al. designed ProtT-VAE, a fusion of a transformer
pretrained on 46 million UniRef50 sequences and an autoencoder that
enables fine-tuning on a sequence library of interest.213 After fine-tuning the model on the phenylalanine
hydroxylase (PAH) sequence family, ProtT-VAE was used to predict variants
with up to 100 mutations, resulting in a 2.5× increase in catalytic
activity over the human wild-type. Similarly, Luo et al. combined
a pretrained language model with an MSA-specific direct coupling method
to capture both general protein syntax and protein-specific epistasis.214 The resulting model, ECNet, was used to engineer
TEM-1 β-lactamase variants with improved ampicillin resistance.

The utilization of unlabeled data in a semisupervised setting has
been tried, for example, in the context of secondary structure prediction
for orphan sequences221 or structural similarity
prediction for protein sequences.222 These
two methods employ pseudolabeling or a custom similarity metric to
enable a supervised learning task to profit from large initially unlabeled
data. In some cases, even self-supervised methods are viewed as semisupervised223 in that they learn powerful representations
from unlabeled data that can then be fine-tuned using small labeled
data sets. However, the difference from semisupervised methods is
that self-supervised methods build on the established methodology
of supervised learning as they formulate a supervised proxy task using
synthetic labels generated automatically from the large unlabeled
data set. Such self-supervised methods are powering the recent successes
of protein language models, discussed at the beginning of this section,
and appear to be generally more successful than traditional semisupervised
methods.

In parallel to the explosive growth of sequence databases,
the
Protein Data Bank reached the landmark value of 200 000 entries
in April of 2023, providing a rich source of experimental structural
data for self-supervised learning about protein structures. A number
of deep learning models have been fitted to large subsets of the PDB
data to leverage the natural diversity of the protein structures.
For example, MutCompute was trained on a nonredundant sample of 19K
proteins to predict artificially masked residues based on the local
3D environment, enabling the model to successfully capture phenotypic
landscapes associated with protein stability.31 Additionally, Zhang et al. designed multiple general tasks for the
self-supervised pretraining of graph neural networks for protein structures,
leading to improved performance in various downstream tasks.68 Self-supervised learning on protein structures
has also been used to suggest protein sequences for specific backbones
and generate de novo protein structures.27,28,207


## Leveraging
Protein Dynamics to Compare Mutations


The preceding sections
focus on the analysis of static data. However,
proteins are complex and dynamic systems, and their conformational
changes and motions often provide key insights into reaction mechanisms
that cannot be obtained by studying static structures alone.224 One way to capture a protein’s dynamics
is by studying its structural ensembles, which are available from
existing protein structure databases in many cases. It has therefore
been suggested that structure-based ML methods trained on such data, e.g., AlphaFold2, could provide insights into protein dynamics.225 Building on this hypothesis, Brotzakis and
coauthors proposed a reweighting procedure using AlphaFold2 predictions
and the FoldingDiff framework27 to generate
structural ensembles for disordered peptides.226 Such procedures could be useful alternatives to computationally
expensive simulations in some cases. However, they are unlikely to
be useful for comparing structural ensembles of closely related protein
variants because AlphaFold2 predictions, which rely on evolutionary
information obtained from MSAs, appear to be insensitive to single-point
mutations139 and so may be unable to accurately
capture the often subtle differences between closely related protein
variants.

Another option is to study molecular dynamics (MD)
trajectories. MD data are obtained by performing simulations that
apply physical laws to calculate the future position of every atom
in a protein after a given time step based on its 3D structure at
the current point in time. The resulting trajectories consist of a
series of snapshots capturing the protein configurations at successive
points in time. Because each snapshot contains the coordinates of
all atoms in the simulated system, the simulation provides a large
amount of data, even for an average-sized protein. Where prior system
knowledge is available, one can use a coarse-grained model to reduce
the system’s dimensionality and potentially capture major motions
of interest.227 In most cases, however,
finding so-called collective variables (CVs) that effectively describe
the system’s dynamic behavior is not straightforward. It has
been suggested that unsupervised learning methods could help solve
the problem of identifying CVs because they can learn from raw MD
trajectories without making assumptions about the CVs that are being
sought. In general, such methods try to find low-dimensional representations
that are rich enough to reconstruct the original (or time-shifted)
input.228 The resulting low-dimensional
projections can then be used to build a simplified model of the protein’s
dynamics. This is often done using Markov state models (MSMs), which
can cluster the conformational space of the simulated molecule into
a tractable number of clusters (states). MSMs assume that the transitions
between these states are Markovian, i.e., the state
in the next time step depends only on the current state regardless
of the previous trajectory. This approach was applied in conjunction
with the end-to-end deep learning model VAMPnet, which was used to
find an optimal projection for the system under study.229 More recently, the CoVAMPnet framework230 was created by expanding on the VAMPnet approach
to add interpretability capabilities and a method for MSM alignment
that facilitates comparisons of MSMs for two sets of simulations.
If applied to different variants of a given protein, CoVAMPnet could
potentially be used to evaluate the effects of discriminative mutations
on protein dynamics. However, this application is yet to be explored.

In general, identifying dynamic features associated with biochemical
differences between protein variants is much more challenging than
finding a low-dimensional representation for a single protein. One
way to address this problem was demonstrated by the DiffNets framework,231 in which supervised autoencoders were trained
on MD trajectories to identify the most significant differences in
pairwise residue distances between protein variants. Another approach
for comparing dynamical changes in variant trajectories involves directly
analyzing the distribution of low-dimensional projections of configurations
obtained by variational autoencoders. In this approach, similar spatial
configurations tend to cluster in certain subspaces of the learned
low-dimensional space. Such clustering can be used, for example, to
analyze the MD simulations of catalytic sites in the presence of different
substrates to identify structural differences that drive substrate
preferences.232 Nonetheless, despite those
promising studies, the problem of comparing MD trajectories of different
protein variants in a systematic way remains largely unexplored, offering
an intriguing future direction for machine learning applications.


## Recent Success Stories and Lessons Learned


While the number of publications on ML for protein engineering
is growing rapidly (Figure 1), only a fraction of these publications incorporate the experimental
validation of generated predictions as opposed to validation using
existing data. This section highlights several recent publications
that do include experimental validation and clearly demonstrate the
great potential of ML in enzymology. We provide more examples of such
studies in Table S1.


## Sequence-Based
Case Studies


Several
publications have showcased recent advances in the use of sequence-based
models, including both models trained on large sequence databases
and models trained on specific enzyme subfamilies. For example, Russ
et al. used a statistical model based on direct coupling analysis
to learn the natural distribution of amino acids in chorismate mutases
and generate 1618 artificial enzyme sequences. Experimental studies
showed that 30% of these proteins rescued the growth of enzyme-deficient Escherichia coli in minimal media.233 Ten of them were characterized in more detail and shown to have
expression and catalytic parameters similar to those of the previously
characterized enzymes. In another case, Repecka et al. used generative
adversarial networks to create artificial malate dehydrogenases.212 Sixty of the resulting artificial proteins
(which had pairwise sequence identities of 45–98% with natural
enzymes) were tested experimentally, revealing that 13 had catalytic
activity comparable to that of natural enzymes. Another interesting
case study was reported by Madani et al., who used a large 1.2 billion-parameter
language model called ProGen for the conditional generation of 100
artificial sequences that were fine-tuned to five distinct lysozyme
families.35 Again, the artificial designs
had expression levels and catalytic efficiencies similar to those
of natural lysozymes even though their sequence identities with the
natural proteins were as low as 31.4% in some cases. In all three
studies, the authors could approach the expression and activity of
natural sequences, but surpassing them by a significant margin still
remains a challenge.


## Structure-Based Case Studies


Designs
superior to wild-type templates could potentially be created by leveraging
structural data. One promising strategy for this purpose is to use
the local structural environment to identify positions suitable for
optimization in wild-type proteins. An insightful recent study on
plastic-degrading enzymes demonstrated the power of this approach.234 Despite extensive research on enzymatic PET
depolymerization, most known PET-hydrolyzing enzymes have poor activity
and require high temperatures or highly processed substrates to be
practically useful. Traditional protein engineering strategies have
improved the thermostability and catalytic activity of PETase variants
under certain conditions, but these variants still show low activity
at mild temperatures. Lu et al. therefore tried to use structure-based
deep learning to solve this problem.234 For this purpose, they used the MutCompute31 algorithm, which was trained to predict masked amino acids based
on their local 3D microenvironment in a crystal structure, to identify
the positions where the predicted probabilities of the wild-type amino
acids were comparatively low, suggesting that some other amino acids
are better “suited” to the corresponding structural
microenvironment. Eight of the top ten suggested substitutions produced
single-point mutants with improved thermostability and activity. Combinatorial
assembly of these substitutions yielded PETase variants with melting
temperatures of up to 83.5 °C (and thus greater thermal stability
than any previously reported variant of this enzyme) and up to 38×
the activity of the template enzymes at 50 °C.

MutCompute
was also used to improve the thermostability of the Bst DNA polymerase,
with a similar success rate: of the top 10 substitutions suggested
by the network, only two were discarded for showing little or no activity,
while the top five yielded activities equal or superior to the template.235 Moreover, variants combining these substitutions
were more robust to purification and exhibited even greater thermotolerance
and thermostability. MutCompute predictions are orthogonal to force-field
calculations and phylogenetic analyses conducted with the popular
automated web tools PROSS236 and FireProt,237 and these predictions can be exploited to remove
destabilizing substitutions from multiple-point mutants designed using
those tools. This was recently demonstrated by the successful stabilization
of haloalkane dehalogenase DhaA115 (PDB ID 6SP5(238)).

An alternative to replacing specific residues to better match structural
patterns in training data is to predict complete protein sequences
corresponding to a given backbone conformation from scratch. Exemplifying
this approach, Dauparas et al. trained the graph-based neural network
ProteinMPNN on a set of 19 700 high-resolution single-chain
structures from PDB and showed that this algorithm can rescue previously
failed designs by suggesting optimized protein sequences for given
scaffold templates.207 For experimental
validation, the authors targeted proteins that had been generated
by deep network hallucination in a previous study239 but proved to be mostly insoluble when expressed in E. coli. Ninety-six designs were processed using ProteinMPNN,
of which 73 were soluble when expressed and 50 had the desired monomeric
or oligomeric state. Moreover, some maintained this state even at
95 °C. This is a promising result because protein insolubility
appears to be a persistent problem with ML-based generated sequences.240 It will therefore be interesting to see if
more enzyme sequences can be reengineered for improved solubility
in this way.

At Loschmidt Laboratories, we developed the sequence-based
solubility
predictor SoluProt26 and integrated it
into EnzymeMiner (https://loschmidt.chemi.muni.cz/enzymeminer/), a more general pipeline for discovering enzymes with a desired
catalytic activity that is available as a fully automated web service.
This pipeline was recently used to mine promising industrially relevant
haloalkane dehalogenases241 and fluorinases.242 In both cases, we obtained soluble and active
enzymes with catalytic performance superior to that of previously
characterized wild-type enzymes and engineered biocatalysts. The broad
applicability of the SoluProt and EnzymeMiner web services is demonstrated
by the fact that they have completed over 30 000 and 3000 jobs, respectively,
in the two years that they have been online. An alternative to natural
sequence mining with EnzymeMiner is to use the deep neural network
ProteinMPNN, which has been applied successfully in the de
novo design of artificial luciferases based on computationally
designed binding pockets.243 Functional
constraints have also recently been incorporated into structure-based
generative models including diffusion-based deep learning methods
for functional motif scaffolding.28


## Small-Data-Set-Based Case Studies


The preceding examples
demonstrate the potential of using unlabeled
data sets to suggest novel protein designs. Moreover, in section 3 we discussed strategies
that leverage small data sets, for example, to fine-tune pretrained
large models in order to enable more focused protein engineering.
However, ML models trained using only small data sets with no pretraining
can also be useful in protein engineering pipelines using simpler
algorithms.

Several case studies combining machine learning
and directed evolution have appeared recently. Based on the initial in silico docking, Büchler et al. chose three critical
amino acid positions in an iron/α-ketoglutarate-dependent halogenase
for full randomization in a library targeted for the use in an algorithm-aided
enzyme engineering strategy.244 After collecting
the activity measurements for 504 unique variants, the authors trained
a Gaussian-process-based model to explore in silico the remaining protein landscape for activity and selectivity. The
subsequent experimental validation revealed active and selective halogenase
variants with over a 90-fold increase in the apparent kcat and a 300-fold increase in the total turnover number.
A smaller data set of 80 variants of Sortase A was used by Saito et
al. to train an ML model to score all possible variants for five mutated
positions.245 After designing primer sequences
to include the top 50 variants in the second-round library, the authors
observed most of the new variants showed high expression levels, with
several demonstrating higher enzyme activity than the first-round
variants. Reiterating the workflow, the authors constructed and validated
the third-round library, again leading to a set of improved variants.
Interestingly, the authors tested and stressed the importance of including
poor-performing variants in the training data, and they still got
promising results in the scenario in which the top-performing variant
was excluded from training. Even a smaller initial library of 20 chimera
sequences was used in a different study by Greenhalgh et al. as a
starting point for ten rounds of sequence optimization of alcohol-forming
fatty acyl reductases, leading to an over twofold increase in fatty
alcohol production compared to the starting sequences.246

In all three case studies above, the
authors used a set of simple
sequence-based features such as one-hot encoding of amino acids, physicochemical
properties of the proteins, or conservation scores. While extracting
features from protein dynamics remains challenging (see section 5.2), a linear
model was recently used to this end to elucidate structure–function
relationships while engineering luciferases.247 This study drew on an earlier indel (insertions and deletions) mutagenesis
experiment targeting a reconstructed ancestral protein and aimed to
identify the factors responsible for the emergence of dual dehalogenase
and luciferase activities.248 The authors
comprehensively studied the dynamics of different variants and used
partial least-squares regression to identify the strongest predictors
of both activities. This knowledge was then used to obtain a design
with lower product inhibition and highly stable glow-type bioluminescence.

These examples are notable because while few groups have the expertise
or infrastructure needed for deep learning, simpler and more accessible
ML methods can still be used to advance traditional protein engineering
pipelines. At the same time, we expect that deep learning tools will
gradually become more accessible and easier to use.


## Major Gaps in the State of the Art


Despite the exciting
applications and promising case studies discussed
above, several significant knowledge gaps remain to be addressed to
take protein engineering to the next level. First, many protein engineering
tasks have yet to benefit from ML, including predicting the effects
of indels and unnatural amino acids, creating predictors that address
several targets simultaneously, and predicting mutational effects
on protein interactions. Second, molecular dynamics remains isolated
from major advances in the application of ML to protein engineering;
dynamical information is rarely if ever used when training current
state-of-the-art predictors. Third, there is a pressing need to establish
gold standard protein data sets because such benchmarks have significantly
accelerated the progress of ML in other domains. Finally, the impact
of ML-based tools often remains limited to a narrow circle of method
developers, so there is a need to reach out to the broader community
of biochemists and synthetic biologists. Below we discuss each of
those gaps in more detail.


## Unexplored Protein Engineering
Tasks


One important objective for the future will be to create
single ML
tools that can perform multiple tasks. Multiobjective protein engineering
is a core goal of many ongoing experimental studies because the introduction
of mutations targeting one property often affects others. For example,
stability and solubility are often negatively correlated and may also
need to be traded off with other properties such as catalytic activity.249 However, current ML-based predictors typically
target only one property at a time. This limitation could potentially
be overcome by combining predictions from multiple tools to define
a so-called Pareto front, i.e., a set of solutions
in which no one member is better than another with respect to all
objectives.250,251 However, by combining the separately
trained predictors, one misses the opportunity to train on a larger
pool of data sets and potentially capture the common underlying mechanisms
in a unified protocol. Approaches of this type are rarely used, possibly
because their implementation would require expert knowledge of multiple
types of data and the experimental techniques used to generate them.

Another major goal is predicting the effects of insertions and
deletions in the amino acid sequence (indels). This area has been
largely unexplored by ML even though indels occur frequently in nature
and can unlock unique functional changes that substitutions alone
cannot achieve.252 Indel engineering is
gaining momentum, however, and experimental studies focusing on indel
mutagenesis are starting to produce interesting labeled data sets.253,254 Protein evolutionary information is another potential source of
data on indels255 that can be used to explore
previously hidden catalytic activities that could be shifted or promoted.256,257 Indels can affect not only the structure of the protein system but
also its dynamics.258 Therefore, molecular
dynamics simulations may provide valuable data for clarifying the
effects of indels on protein dynamics and their functional consequences.

The vastness of the combinatorial protein sequence space can be
further extended by introducing unnatural amino acid (UAA) substitutions.
Experimental studies have successfully incorporated over 150 different
UAA substitutions into protein sequences,259 including multiple point mutants.260 These
substitutions can be used for diverse purposes, ranging from tailoring
the structural, physical, and dynamic properties of specific sites
to introducing new properties by adding carefully designed UAAs. Such
additions can be used to enhance enzyme activity or elucidate the
enzyme reaction mechanisms.261 While there
are some emerging ML-based tools for rational design of UAA sites,262 further research and development are needed
to make this approach widely applicable in enzyme engineering.

Another area that would benefit from the greater use of ML is the
design of protein–protein and protein–ligand complexes.
Despite recent promising results in the use of ML to predict the binding
sites and protein–ligand complexes,29,263,264 reliable and practically useful
approaches for designing noncovalent interactions are still missing.
For example, Geng et al. found that the evolution of ΔΔG
predictors for protein–protein interactions had been hindered
by the absence of centralized benchmarking.265 Little progress has been made in this area, as evidenced by the
re-emergence of similar ML models and the persisting lack of common
evaluation standards.156,266,267 Furthermore, the reliability of existing models is undermined by
a frequent reliance on supervised ML with limited annotated data.268

Finally, most ML-based predictors represent
primary protein sequences
at the level of amino acids. However, synonymous mutations that do
not change the amino acid sequence can still significantly impact
protein expression and function269,270 or can even
relate to particular structural features.271,272 Predictors working on the level of nucleotides or codons may thus
be better tools for protein design and modification, particularly
in areas such as prediction of expression, solubility, and aggregation.
The fact that the 64-letter codon alphabet serves to encode richer
information than the 20-letter amino acid alphabet can be directly
exploited by ML models for improving performance on a wide range of
tasks that are now being tackled at the protein sequence level.273 While there have been several studies, e.g., tackling protein expression optimization,274 melting temperatures, subcellular localization,
solubility or function,273 we believe further
research in this area might provide a strong boost for predicting
many essential protein characteristics but will require rethinking
of the existing data sets at the nucleotide level.


## Learning from Protein Dynamics


Protein
dynamics profoundly influence biological phenomena and properties
ranging from enzyme mechanisms to protein stability and must therefore
be taken into account when designing enzymes.275 The value of analyzing protein ensembles rather than single-protein
structures has been demonstrated in contexts including predicting
thermal stability276 and identifying the
long-range conformational dynamic effect on residues involved in substrate
reorientation277 and reactivity-promoting
regions.278 Therefore, tools that can generate
dynamic data without extensive computational or experimental data
collection would be extremely valuable. This has motivated the development
of new methods for generating representative ensembles from structure279 or sequence data.280

Despite the growing availability of protein dynamics data
from sources such as MD simulations, current methods for predicting
protein properties are mainly based on single sequences or static
structures. This is partly because several challenges must be overcome
when MD results are incorporated into the training and inference
phases of classical ML pipelines. The first challenge concerns data
representation: predictive models typically work with static structures.
One possible strategy could be to include a limited set of quantities
derived from a trajectory, e.g., the flexibility
of structural elements expressed in terms of their B-factors, in the
set of input features. Another possibility would be to select a subset
of conformations to be used during training. For example, one might
use apo and holo structures or representative conformations chosen
with various clustering methods or Markov State Modeling. However,
the applicability of these methods to training data sets of multiple
proteins has yet to be explored.

An interesting recent approach
that could help with data processing
is “dataset distillation”,281 which builds on research related to distillation of neural network
models.282 In data set distillation, the
goal is to distill a larger data set into a smaller one of potentially
artificial examples so that models trained on the smaller data set
can match the performance of those trained on the larger one. This
process was first demonstrated in the image recognition domain by
distilling the well-known MNIST data set283 of 60k images into just 10 synthetic images (one per class); models
trained on the distilled data set achieved performance closely approaching
that of models trained on the original data set.281 At present, data set distillation has been most beneficial
for models that are retrained multiple times, such as those used in continual learning or NN architecture searching. The use of
data set distillation is conditioned on the existence of large data
sets and relevant models that can be trained on those data. So far,
relatively little work has been done on distilling temporal data such
as videos,284 but as soon as data set distillation
demonstrates its utility in the domain of video analysis, we expect
this technology to become applicable to processing of MD trajectories
as well. Data set distillation techniques have recently been comprehensively
reviewed by Yu et al.285 and Lei et al.286

The lack of training data and benchmarks
appears to be another
fundamental barrier to the systematic integration of MD data into
ML-based protein engineering pipelines. Compiling data sets of MD
trajectories presents both technical and scientific challenges resulting
from the inconsistent file formats due to the use of different simulation
packages,287 huge file sizes, and the fact
that MD data are rarely published. Furthermore, MD trajectories can
be very sensitive to the choice of force fields288 and other settings. This high variability of simulation
data makes compiling large, consistent, high-quality data sets truly
challenging. The application of the FAIR principles289 to the publication of biomolecular simulation results is
thus an important first step toward building relevant data sets and
benchmarks and will encourage further development of the field by
greatly increasing data availability. The initiative of publishing
the MD trajectories is also called upon by Tiemann et al., who performed
an extensive MD data mining exercise and demonstrated the utility
of publicly accessible data.290 The prioritization
of building data sets for specific proteins or protein families appears
to be a reasonable next step, followed by exploring the possibility
of transferring knowledge between different protein families.291


## Missing Gold-Standard Data
Sets


High-quality
data benchmarks are major drivers of progress in ML research.292 For instance, the remarkable progress in image
classification can largely be attributed to the existence of well-prepared
and maintained benchmarks: an early example was the MNIST collection
of hand-written digits,283,293 which was later complemented
by the PASCAL visual object classification (VOC) challenge data set
of real photographs293 and the ImageNet
data set.294 MNIST enabled the first successes
of deep learning on hand-written digits,295 while the PASCAL VOC data set and the associated challenge established
standard benchmarking practices in computer vision research, including
the use of a hidden test set. Over the past decade, the benchmarking
of progressively more advanced convolutional neural networks on ImageNet
has produced models with superhuman classification performance.296 Here it is important to stress the difference
between a data set and a benchmark data set: to qualify as a benchmark,
a data set must satisfy stringent quality criteria, have well-defined
benchmarking tasks and performance metrics, and have a predefined
split into training and test sets.297 Moreover,
the performance of all models on the MNIST data set is measured in
terms of the percentage of wrong classifications. Such universally
accepted benchmarking criteria enable clear and fair evaluations of
the practical performance of proposed models, eliminate the need to
spend time on data preparation, and introduce an element of competition
into model development.

While such benchmarking practices are
standard in traditional ML domains, they remain far from common in
protein engineering for several reasons. First, the complexity of
the domain presents challenges in collecting data and ensuring their
quality. The quality of ImageNet was guaranteed by manual verification
of each image, which was achieved by creating a special interactive
web site to which any nonexpert could contribute. The bulk of the
annotation of one million images was done using annotation services,
such as Amazon Mechanical Turk. However, protein data require much
more involved manual curation by domain experts, making such approaches
unusable. Automated curation may be feasible for some types of data, e.g., MMseqs2 and Foldseek enable fast deduplication and
clustering of sequences80,298 and monomeric structures.80,298 However, it is extremely difficult for data sets focusing on the
catalytic activity, specificity, enantioselectivity, or solubility.
Large-scale data cleaning also remains challenging for protein–protein
interfaces, which are highly repetitive due to the redundancy of the
PDB.31,299,300

Next,
the selection of a suitable ML evaluation metric and data
split may be challenging because of the inherent interdisciplinarity
of protein engineering. The establishment of benchmark components
requires a deep understanding of the intricacies of biochemistry as
well as expertise in ML. For example, mutational data sets can be
split at the level of specific substitutions, mutation sites, specific
proteins, or protein families while ensuring that no entry in the
test set is repeated in the training data. However, even in a simple
setting using protein sequences, splitting at the protein level becomes
challenging if the data set contains many homologs or protein variants,
and many authors use different sequence identity cutoffs for clustering
data before splitting. Protein structure-based learning introduces
additional complexity into the process of defining splits. Distinct
sequences may have very similar tertiary structures, necessitating
the use of more advanced geometric or graph-based splitting conditions.
However, such methods are rarely applied, leading to the use of a
wide variety of splits that limits model comparability.156 For example, a widely used data set that was
reported to suffer from improper splitting301 is PDBBind.302 Simple random splits may
result in data leakage, especially when using highly redundant or
nonuniform data sets.77,303,304

The Critical Assessment of Structure Prediction (CASP) is
the best
example of a well-established benchmark in protein science.305 It has been produced and maintained by a community-driven
effort that has been ongoing for almost three decades, enabled the
success of AlphaFold2, and is continually being extended to new and
more complex tasks.99 Despite the existence
of several other CASP-inspired benchmarks such as Critical Assessment
of Prediction of Interactions (CAPRI) and Critical Assessment of Function
Annotation (CAFA),306,307 standard benchmarks for protein
design are still lacking. This problem is attracting attention; for
example, Dallago et al. recently introduced the Fitness Landscape
Inference for Proteins (FLIP) benchmark,303 which addresses three protein engineering problems by including:
(i) an almost complete mutational landscape (149 361 of 160 000
variants) of four strongly epistatic residues of the G protein, (ii)
the more diverse and sparsely sampled landscape of the AAV capsid
protein, and (iii) the highly diverse thermostability landscape of
proteins from different domains of life. Similar benchmarks are also
appearing in related disciplines such as genomics308 and drug discovery.75,309 Calls for defining
clear criteria for the study of epistasis and residue coevolution
patterns can be found in the literature;175 these criteria could enable the emergence of new benchmarks. We
hope to see more initiatives creating and supporting benchmarking
in the future, as they could dramatically accelerate progress in ML
for protein design.


## Poor Transfer of Knowledge
from Concept to
Application


Even when authors have performed appropriate
independent method validation and convinced readers of the superiority
of their tool, the transfer of knowledge from published methodologies
to new applications seems to be frustratingly slow. Despite the rapidly
growing number of publications describing applications of ML in protein
engineering, surprisingly few studies have followed up on published
methods and applied them to new protein targets. The main obstacle
to such work appears to be the limited accessibility of ML methods
to researchers without expertise in computer science, e.g., biochemists. One established scientific publishing standard for
new ML methods is that protocols and scripts should be included with
the submitted manuscript.310 While this
improves the peer-review process, potential future users of such tools
are generally less comfortable running such scripts than reviewers.
Therefore, if a new method is available only as a collection of scripts
in a GitHub repository, it is unlikely to have much impact outside
the narrow community of ML developers.

Creating at least a minimalistic
user-friendly interface is thus vital for making methods widely accessible
to users other than their developers, even though it generally requires
additional work from the developers that is outside the scope of their
research objectives. The explosive growth in the number of users of
ChatGPT 3.5 and later versions has been partially attributed to its
simple dialogue-like interface, which is accessible even to users
without knowledge of ML. Similarly, the AlphaFold2 release was followed
by the dissemination of a Google Colab notebook,311 allowing it to be used by researchers in a way that is
much more user-friendly than downloading code from GitHub. In Loschmidt
Laboratories, we have been developing user-friendly tools for over
two decades (https://loschmidt.chemi.muni.cz/portal/), and we often hear how crucial the ease of use of these tools is
to our users. We ensure this ease of use by making efforts to support
popular input formats (ideally, using file types that a typical user
will have at hand), creating intuitive and well-guided settings (ideally,
with a default setup that will provide reasonable results in most
use cases), and providing comprehensive and easily understood reporting
of results. We also strongly encourage other developers to invest
time into making their tools accessible to other communities, such
as enzymologists or biochemists. Moreover, it is usually helpful to
contact past or potential users to understand how they see the method
and what functionality they would benefit from in addition to the
method itself. This could include fetching sequences and structures
from databases, submitting multiple sequences or mutations as a single
input, suggesting designs for experimental validation, or even allowing
output graphics to be easily transferred to a publication.

We
also encourage authors to be more open about the limitations
of their tools in publications. When published case studies use additional
steps, e.g., manual fine-tuning, these should be
discussed explicitly in the main text of a publication or in instructions
for using tools. While there is pressure to present a tool’s
performance in the most favorable light, any cherrypicking will eventually
disappoint future users and undermine the trust in the entire domain.
To be successful, ML requires users and the wider community to trust
its predictions and be convinced that the tools have been assessed
fairly. Consequently, there are active efforts to improve reporting
standards for ML tools in modern biology, and several clear guidelines
have recently appeared to guide authors in preparing manuscripts dealing
with ML.12,310,312 However,
there will be a lag phase before such rules are universally adopted.


## Future Opportunities



## Trustworthiness
and Explainable AI


In many domains, including medicine and
finance, it is vital for
ML systems to be interpretable and explainable to build trust in the
algorithms. Understanding the mechanisms behind making a prediction
can also enable more rigorous verification of a tool or provide clues
for follow-up decision-making. In this context, an explainable model
is one that provides insights into the reasons for its predictions
and decisions, for example, by showing which parts of the input have
the greatest impact on predictions. Conversely, an interpretable model
is one for which the internal process of making predictions can be
readily understood by humans. This can be achieved by having an explicit
decision pathway in a decision tree or easy-to-grasp feature weights
in a simple linear equation. If ML algorithms are not mathematically
complex, they are often intrinsically explicable and interpretable.
However, interpreting and explaining their predictions becomes more
challenging as the algorithms become more complicated. This is why
models such as deep neural networks are often described as black boxes.
The field of explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) seeks to overcome
this challenge by creating explanations using analytics, saliency
maps, or words to allow humans to understand why an ML algorithm makes
a certain decision or prediction.

A range of XAI methods have
been proposed in recent years313,314 (Figure 4) and are discussed in more
detail in two recent comprehensive reviews.313,315 Two simple strategies for XAI are to use self-explainable white-box
methods and to check how changing inputs affect the outputs of black-box
networks. Feature importance methods are a notable class of white-box
methods that achieve explainability by identifying essential features
based on model parameters such as weights and coefficients. For example,
in a linear regression algorithm, scientists can determine the importance
of each feature based on the magnitude of the associated coefficients.
Propagation-based approaches are another class of white-box methods
that are often used for similar purposes in deep learning. One of
the recent methods in this class is layer-wise relevance propagation,
which propagates predictions from the output to the input using propagation
rules evaluated at each node of a neural network.316 As this method relies on simple formulas, it does not require
computationally demanding sampling and is relatively robust to noise
and other artifacts during training.313

An
overview of explainable AI methods. The figure illustrates the
concepts using the task of predicting protein solubility from primary
structure data as an example. (a) Perturbation methods check the effect
of changes in input data on output; a significant change in output
causes the corresponding input to be marked as crucial for prediction
(darker red colors on the output indicate a higher difference in prediction
and hence higher importance for the output). Perturbed amino acids
in the input are underlined. (b) Propagation methods use the network
structure and move from the prediction to the input to determine which
parts of the input have the greatest impact on the prediction (here,
darker colors indicate greater impact on the prediction). (c) Transparent
networks are designed to be interpretable, for example, by specific
choices of their architecture or the individual building blocks (e.g., filters in a convolutional network might be interpreted
as specific relevant sequence motifs identified during training).
Here different parts of the network (shown in different colors) are
related to different parts of the input sequence (illustrated in the
same colors).

For black-box models, explainability
and interpretability
are generally
achieved by analyzing the input-output behavior. For example, Shapley
values estimate the contribution of each feature by evaluating its
marginal impact on the output. Unfortunately, this approach requires
significant computational resources and scales poorly with increasing
numbers of features.317 Another strategy
is to approximate a black-box model with a more interpretable analogue.
This approach is exemplified by the LIME method,318 which mimics the predictions of any classifier in an interpretable
and faithful manner by locally approximating the decision boundary
using a linear regression or a decision tree. Another black-box method
explains model predictions by perturbing the input data and analyzing
the differences between the actual output and the output for the perturbed
data set. If a particular perturbation of the input produces large
differences in output, the changed parts of the data set are marked
as being essential for prediction.319

Another approach to incorporating explainability into ML pipeline
is to pursue explainability during the development of the pipeline
rather than when the predictor is released, e.g.,
by using transparent neural networks.320 Such neural networks are designed to be more interpretable and understandable
by humans. Prior knowledge, such as existing biological knowledge
and experimental data, can help scientists develop such models. For
example, a convolutional neural network could be designed to learn
filters that correspond to known protein structural motifs.321 Alternatively, one could use knowledge-primed
neural networks in which nodes correspond to proteins that are connected
based on prior knowledge.322

The
ML methods that are increasingly being applied in protein engineering
are often complex and challenging to interpret. Because wet-lab validation
of ML-designed proteins and enzymes is expensive and time-consuming,
it is vital to reinforce the credibility of AI-assisted protein engineering
and ensure that experimentalists can be confident that the methods
will produce designs with a good chance of success in the lab. XAI
can strengthen credibility by providing insights into the decision-making
processes of ML models in protein engineering.323 It can also help scientists to improve their algorithms
by revealing mistakes and biases.324 The
use of XAI to explain deep learning networks has therefore recently
attracted interest in areas of drug discovery, chemistry, and protein
engineering including active ligand searching,325 prediction of enzyme EC numbers,326 and identifying residues that indicate transitions between active
and inactive states in GPCR receptors.327

In protein engineering, explainable AI is primarily applied
for
the analysis of predictions from ML models with the aim of obtaining
novel biochemistry knowledge. Namely, Tan et al. introduced ExplainableFold,328 a concept designed to improve the understanding
of deep learning-based protein structure prediction models such as
AlphaFold by residue deletions and residue substitutions. Essentially,
the core objective of ExplainableFold is to uncover influential residues
responsible for maintaining or altering a folded protein structure.
More generally, it was also proposed that the application of tools
such as exBERT,329 originally designed
for visualizing internal representations of transformers, could be
employed in protein-trained transformers to highlight relationships
among amino acids.330 Ultimately, the use
of explainable AI for protein design is still in its early phase and
we have yet to see its main applications in protein engineering pipelines.


## Identification of Hidden Biases


ML
models can be biased by the data used in their training, which can
reduce their overall accuracy or cause their performance to vary
substantially across the data input space, e.g.,
the protein sequence space or the space of protein structures. In
supervised learning, special attention must be paid to the problem
of class imbalance,331−333 which occurs when there are more training
examples for some classes than for others. In such cases, the model
might overpredict the major classes.334 In unsupervised learning, these biases might be harder to spot and
quantify. For example, in natural language processing, large self-supervised
language models are typically trained on vast amounts of text that
are often sourced from the Internet without thorough data curation.
If left unchecked, these models can reportedly generate unjust or
oppressive language, which promotes discrimination, exclusion, and
toxicity.335 The risk of compromising model
performance by using biased training data is as relevant in enzyme
engineering as in any other field.31 However,
in contrast to natural languages, it is not directly apparent what
adverse biases could be adopted by models in enzymology, as there
is no quick and simple strategy to directly validate outputs. Therefore,
responsibility and caution are advised, especially when different
sources of data are combined, e.g., with the data
from human genomic databases, which were reported to be racially biased.336

A typical example of a bias in enzymatic
data arises in the task of predicting mutational stability, where
a predictor given an original and mutated sequence as inputs should
report a single number corresponding to the predicted ΔΔG.
In general, a random mutation of a natural protein is more likely
to be destabilizing than stabilizing,337 and this bias often propagates to stability data sets, leading to
an issue similar to the class imbalance problem resulting in the overprediction
of destabilizing mutations. To combat such effects, it has become
standard to exploit the antisymmetry of mutational stability, which
arises from the physical principle described by the following equation:338 ΔΔG(WT →
Mut) = −ΔΔG(Mut → WT).
That is, the change in ΔG upon mutating a residue
is equal to the negative change in ΔG that
would be induced by the hypothetical inverse mutation. This property
makes it possible to augment the training data set by adding artificial
inverse mutations from the mutant sequence (Mut) to the wild-type
sequence (WT) to obtain a balanced data set. Antisymmetry can also
be incorporated by design, ensuring that the property is enforced
even when using an imbalanced training set.339 Interestingly, efforts to solve the problem of predicting protein
stability changes upon mutation have driven progress in other sensitivity
studies, e.g., the use of reduced amino acid alphabets
to account for bias in the representation of mutations in the training
data,131 structural sensitivity,340 or the “scaffold bias” of using
crystallographic structures instead of AlphaFold models in ensembles.276 Another task where data set biases were reported
is structure-based virtual screening. This problem was recently tackled
using an ML-based scoring function in which the authors took care
to ensure that feature importance was consistent with human knowledge;
this forced the model to learn relevant features regardless of the
present biases, leading to better generalizability.341

In many cases, however, even a detailed understanding
of the studied
task will not reveal straightforward paths for uncovering and fixing
biases because problems often arise from intricate interdependencies
between data points that researchers are unaware of. To combat such
issues, the concept of multicalibration has been proposed.342 The aim of multicalibration is to make predictors
perform more uniformly across different data subclasses. However,
the complexity of the proposed approach is linear with respect to
the number of possible subsets of the training data and, thus, exponential
with respect to the number of training samples. To alleviate this
high computational cost, other studies proposed low-degree multicalibration
by drawing on the multicalibration and multi-accuracy approaches.343,344 These concepts are currently mainly being studied within the domain
of algorithmic fairness,345 which is largely
concerned with ML-based predictors that process personal data on human
individuals. It is interesting to see if these concepts will be useful
in the context of enzymology, for example, by ensuring that learned
predictors have similar performance for different protein families.


## Other Promising Methods


One current
trend in machine learning is that models are increasing in size in
parallel with the increasing amount of data on which they are trained.
Models such as ChatGPT and DALL-E38 are
shining examples of this trend. To increase the size of the data sets
available for model training in protein engineering, it may be necessary
to use as much available experimental data as possible, accepting
that experimental data sets will inevitably vary widely in quality
and size. To bridge the gap between small high-quality and large low-quality
data sets, meta-learning appears to be a promising strategy. In such
an approach, nested optimization could be employed for training on
a large set of noisy examples in the inner loop and a small set of
trusted examples in the outer loop, thus suppressing the impact of
the noise in the larger data set.346

Molecular simulations using MD and quantum mechanical methods could
be another valuable source of data for training large, data-hungry
models. However, these simulations are very computationally demanding,
as demonstrated by Musaelian et al., who recently used machine-learned
potentials in simulations of biomolecules using 5120 A100 GPUs in
parallel.347 The hardware requirements
of MD using such large data sets could be met using purpose-built
supercomputers such as Anton 3.348 Advances
in quantum computing (QC) technology could also make large-scale molecular
simulations more accessible, as well as benefit generative ML tasks349 and improve the generalizability of models
trained on limited data.350 However, the
greatest benefit of QC in enzyme engineering will likely result from
its expected ability to greatly accelerate quantum and molecular mechanics
simulations.351,352

Given the trend toward
ever-larger models, it is important to consider
the cost of their training and the CO2 emissions resulting
from the training and inference process.353 This issue can be addressed by adopting energy-saving ML practices,354 implementing architectural redundancy to bypass
lengthy training processes,355 or obviating
the need for large model training by narrowing problems down to simple
linear combinations of system-relevant physical properties.356 Another important recent trend in machine learning
involves lightweight adaptation of large pretrained models to new
tasks using adaptor layers.201,357 These methods change
only a small fraction of the parameters of the large scale pretrained
model for the new task, leaving the vast majority untouched. This
allows large models to be adapted to new tasks at a fraction of their
initial training costs; the time required for adaptation may be as
little as several hours on a single eight-GPU machine,358,359 eliminating the need for the supercomputer infrastructure used to
train the original model. This significantly accelerates model adaptation
and makes such training and related research accessible to a wide
community of researchers who may lack supercomputer access.

Another promising area of application for ML is further automation
of enzyme engineering pipelines, for example, by using reinforcement
learning (RL) to select structural or biophysical motifs that
are important for a target property.360 Several recent advances in RL have focused on small molecule design.361 However, when combined with recent advances
in protein science, RL has also shown promise in the design of protein
complexes362 or peptide binders with high
affinities.363 Based on this expansion
of its applicability domains, we believe that RL could be similarly
useful in enzyme engineering. Enabling more user-friendly pipeline
interaction, for example, by creating ChatGPT-like interfaces to simplify
the control and running of experiments, can potentially further contribute
to the automation of the workflows.


## Conclusions


We live in exciting times
that provide many opportunities to explore
new horizons in enzyme engineering and machine learning. Many ambitious
tasks are already being tackled by cutting-edge data-driven algorithms
and approaches, often inspired by their spectacular performance in
other domains. The tools created on their basis are already playing
integral roles in studies aiming to discover and improve biocatalysts.
On the other hand, many more goals are still waiting for the appearance
of suitable data sets and data processing protocols to be eventually
leveraged by machine learning. There are many challenges ahead, including
the creation of reliable and user-friendly tools for generating promising
protein designs by users with limited ML knowledge, addressing multiple
tasks in one pipeline, incorporating protein dynamics in ML pipelines,
understanding the effects of insertions, deletions, or unnatural amino
acids, increasing the interpretability of the models, and revealing
hidden data biases. One of the most significant takeaways from the
success of machine learning in other domains, such as natural language
processing or computer vision, is the role of large-scale data collection
and curation. As biochemistry data tend to be more challenging to
acquire than, for example, images or text, developing mechanisms for
open sharing and aggregation of data sets across the entire scientific
community could have game-changing effects. Building and maintaining
community-wide training data sets and benchmarks, including such ambitious
data types as protein dynamics, could create entirely new ways for
designing proteins that would shape the future of biotechnology.


## Acknowledgments


T.P. is supported by the Czech Science
Foundation (GA CR)
Grant 21-11563M and by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research
and innovation programme under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant
agreement 891397. P. Kouba and P. Kohout are holders of the Brno Ph.D.
Talent scholarship funded by the Brno City Municipality and the JCMM.
P. Kouba, A.B., R.S., J. Sedlar, and J. Sivic were supported by the
European Regional Development Fund under the project IMPACT (reg.
no. CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/15_003/0000468). This work was also supported
by Czech Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports [CETOCOEN Excellence
CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/17_043/0009632, ESFRI RECETOX RI LM2023069, ESFRI
ELIXIR LM2023055]; Technology Agency of the Czech Republic under the
NCC Programme from the state budget (RETEMED TN02000122) and under
the NRP from the EU RRF (TEREP TN02000122/001N); CETOCOEN EXCELLENCE
Teaming project supported by the European Union’s Horizon 2020
research and innovation programme under grant agreement no. 857560; the project National Institute for
Cancer Research (Programme EXCELES, no. LX22NPO5102) (funded by the
European Union) Next Generation EU; and COST (European Cooperation
in Science and Technology) [COST Action COZYME CA21162]. This publication
reflects only the author’s view, and the European Commission
is not responsible for any use that may be made of the information
it contains.


## Supporting Information Available


The Supporting Information
is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acscatal.3c02743.

Selected recent case studies
combining machine learning
and protein engineering and a list of databases and data sets for
machine learning applications in protein engineering (PDF)


## Author Contributions


# These authors contributed equally to this study.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.


## Supplementary Material


cs3c02743_si_001.pdf


## References



## Associated Data



## Supplementary Materials


cs3c02743_si_001.pdf